Title: An In-Vitro Study on Cross-Lingual Generalization in Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26683v1

Published Time: Wed, 27 May 2026 00:55:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# An In-Vitro Study on Cross-Lingual Generalization in Language Models 

Adrian Cosma 

Dalle Molle Institute for Artificial Intelligence (IDSIA) 

adrian.cosma@idsia.ch 

Abstract 

Cross-lingual transfer in language models is difficult to study in natural corpora because lexical overlap, morphology, data imbalance, and tokenization are entangled. We introduce an in-vitro framework with two procedurally generated languages that share the same ontol-ogy, typed grammar, and compositional struc-ture, but differ in surface realization. This lets us independently vary lexical distance, minority-language proportion, tokenizer train-ing regime, and vocabulary size, while evalu-ating transfer on a masked minority-language condition whose lexical forms are never ob-served during training. Across 700 controlled runs, we find that transfer is governed less by tokenizer balance or raw lexical similar-ity than by whether tokenization preserves reusable cross-lingual substructure. Smaller vocabularies often improve masked transfer by keeping words decomposable into shared frag-ments, whereas larger vocabularies can turn forms into language-specific atoms. We further show that transfer emerges as a staged process: grammatical and type-level competence pre-cede masked lexical generalization. Finally, we attempt to explain this mechanism through to-kenizer bridges and show that bridge strength correlates strongly with masked reachability. 

1 Introduction 

Language models (LMs) exhibit cross-lingual trans-fer: training on one language can improve perfor-mance in another even without direct supervision in the target language (Zhao et al., 2024; De Souza et al., 2024). Yet the mechanism behind this trans-fer remains unclear. In this work, we ask the ques-tion: How are semantic language capabilities trans-ferred during training through surface forms? 

Prior work suggests that multilingual mod-els develop both language-specific and shared language-agnostic representations (Zhao et al., 2024; De Souza et al., 2024), but existing evidence remains mixed on the role of language similarity and data composition (Malkin et al., 2022; Lim-isiewicz et al., 2023b), while tokenization has re-peatedly emerged as a critical interface between surface form and meaning (Rust et al., 2021; Patil et al., 2022; Hämmerl et al., 2025). However, in nat-ural multilingual corpora, lexical overlap, morphol-ogy, script, domain, corpus size, and tokenization all vary at once, making it difficult to determine which factors actually enable knowledge learned in one language to become useful in another (Blevins and Zettlemoyer, 2022). In this work, we study cross-lingual generaliza-tion in vitro . We build a framework to procedurally generate two languages, A and B, that share the same underlying ontology, typed grammar, and compositional structure, but differ in their lexical realization. This lets us parameterize the genera-tion process with three factors that are usually con-founded in natural data: lexical distance between languages, the relative amount of training data in each language, and the granularity induced by sub-word tokenization. We further define a masked minority-language condition, B†, by withholding a subset of lexical realizations from language B

during training. Success on B†therefore requires the model to transfer shared compositional struc-ture across languages rather than merely memorize minority-language surface forms. Our setup en-ables the study of multilingual transfer in a con-trolled manner, pertaining to the larger context of learning mechanics (Michaud et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2025; Allen-Zhu and Li, 2025). In particular, our setup enables us to test the following hypotheses from literature: 

H1 Tokenizer Influence: Cross-lingual transfer depends less on tokenizer balance itself than on whether tokenization preserves shared sub-word bridges between languages (Rust et al., 2021; Patil et al., 2022; Hämmerl et al., 2025) 

> arXiv:2605.26683v1 [cs.CL] 26 May 2026

H2 Lexical Similarity: Lexically similar lan-guages will result in easier cross-lingual trans-fer (Kunchukuttan et al., 2018; Gooskens and Swarte, 2017; Hernandez et al., 2021) 

H3 Language Proportions: Increasing the amount of minority-language data should im-prove target language capabilities, though evi-dence suggests that the benefits are condition-dependent (Malkin et al., 2022; Limisiewicz et al., 2023b). 

H4 Skill Cascade: Cross-lingual transfer is pre-ceded by a cascade of skills that are required: learning the majority language (grammar, type constraints), learning the minority language (grammar, type constraints), then generalize to unseen concepts (Blevins et al., 2022; Lubana et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024). We attempt to formalize the cross-lingual trans-fer mechanism through tokenizer bridges . For each masked lexical item, we measure how strongly its tokenization overlaps with observed lexical forms under the same tokenizer. We find that this bridge strength correlates with masked reachabil-ity, suggesting that transfer improves when un-seen target-language forms remain connected to observed forms through shared subword fragments. The resulting view is that multilingual generaliza-tion is a property of the tokenized topology through which languages are presented to the model. Our contributions are as follows: 1. We introduce a controlled in-vitro framework for studying cross-lingual transfer under in-dependently varied lexical distance, language proportion, tokenizer regime, and vocabulary size. 2. We define a masked minority-language con-dition that isolates cross-lingual generaliza-tion from memorization of observed target-language forms. 3. We show that smaller vocabularies and reusable subword structure can improve masked transfer, while larger vocabularies may suppress it by isolating languages into more language-specific units. 4. We propose tokenizer bridges as a potential explanation for masked cross-lingual transfer and show that bridge strength predicts masked reachability. 

2 Related Work 

Prior work suggests that multilingual LMs develop both language-specific and language-agnostic rep-resentations (Zhao et al., 2024; De Souza et al., 2024). Evidence for shared internal structure comes from probing studies identifying overlap-ping or language-specific neurons (Wendler et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024), from synthetic pretraining experiments showing transfer across unrelated sur-face forms (Papadimitriou and Jurafsky, 2020), and from studies of multilingual pretraining mixtures (De Souza et al., 2024). These findings suggest that LMs can abstract away from surface realization and capture latent structure shared across languages. At the same time, cross-lingual transfer is strongly shaped by the tokenization interface through which text enters the model. Unlike hu-mans, whose mutual intelligibility is mediated by vocabulary, phonology, and syntax (Gooskens and Van Heuven, 2021; Escudero and Boersma, 2004; Gooskens and Swarte, 2017), LMs operate over subword units induced by data-driven tokenizers. This can introduce systematic unfairness across languages, especially when tokenizer training data is dominated by high-resource languages (Lim-isiewicz et al., 2023a; Petrov et al., 2023; Arnett et al., 2026; Hämmerl et al., 2025; Patil et al., 2022). Prior work has therefore explored both tokenizer-level interventions (Abagyan et al., 2025; Jabbar, 2023) and architecture-level alternatives (Xue et al., 2022; Ahia et al., 2024; Cosma et al., 2025). How-ever, the interaction between language similarity, data proportions, and tokenization remains difficult to isolate in natural multilingual corpora. 

This work. We study multilingual transfer in a con-trolled synthetic setting that isolates language simi-larity, training proportions, and tokenizer parame-ters. Instead of relying on natural languages, where domain, ontology, and lexical similarity are heav-ily confounded, we construct programmatic lan-guages over a shared semantic space (Taguchi and Sproat, 2026). Building on Lubana et al. (2025), we generate controlled lexical realizations on top of a Probabilistic Context-Sensitive Grammar with type constraints. Our evaluation tests generaliza-tion to concept realizations unseen during training, across multiple abstraction levels: word validity, grammaticality, constraint satisfaction, and lexical reachability of masked concepts. This allows us to examine when multilingual transfer emerges during training, and how semantic structure is transferred across distinct lexical forms. More broadly, our setup follows a line of work using formal grammars and synthetic data to expose learning dynamics that are difficult to identify in natural data with many confounders (Papadimitriou and Jurafsky, 2023; Lubana et al., 2025; Allen-Zhu and Li, 2025; Hu et al., 2025; Blevins and Zettlemoyer, 2022). 

3 In-Vitro Cross-Lingual Setup 

3.1 Setup Formalization 

Our objective is to isolate how cross-lingual trans-fer depends on lexical similarity between lan-guages, language proportions in the training corpus, and subword tokenization granularity. In our framework, we model language as a struc-tured symbolic system specified by (i) a vocabu-lary of abstract symbols, (ii) a type signature over those symbols, (iii) a grammar that defines syn-tactically well-formed sentences, and (iv) a real-ization function that maps abstract symbols to sur-face language-specific word forms. We extend the setup of Lubana et al. (2025) to account for multi-language realizations on top of the typed gram-mar. Readers are referred to the original work for more details on the framework implementation. As such, we do not treat language in the full sociolin-guistic sense (Ballard, 1980), but rather as a finite generative system with a shared abstract layer and language-specific realizations. We study cross-lingual generalization in a con-trolled multilingual pretraining setting with two procedurally generated languages, denoted with 

A and B. For notational convenience, we index them by ℓ ∈ { A, B}. We also define a masked evaluation condition, denoted B†, which is de-rived from B by withholding a subset of minority-language lexical realizations during training. All three conditions share the same underlying ontol-ogy and compositional rules, but differ in their lexical surface realization. We show in Figure 1 a diagram of our setup. 

Symbolic system and language realization. Alanguage is a 6-tuple: ℓ = (V, T , τ, G, Γ, ρ ℓ),where: • V is a finite inventory of abstract lexical sym-bols; • T is a finite set of types; • τ : V → T assigns each symbol a type; • G is a probabilistic grammar over V that gen-erates well-formed symbolic sequences; • Γ ⊆ C × P is an ontology of semantically valid concept–property pairs, where C, P ⊆ V.• ρℓ : V → Σ∗ 

> ℓ

, a realization function which maps abstract symbols to surface forms in language ℓ to a vocabulary Σℓ.In particular, we define G as a Probabilistic Context-Sensitive Grammar (PCSG) (see Appendix A). For the ontology, let C = {c1, . . . , c NC } and 

P = {p1, . . . , p NP } be finite sets of concepts and 

properties , respectively. We assume a typed re-lational structure Γ ⊆ C × P , where (c, p ) ∈ Γ

indicates that property p is semantically valid for concept c. This defines the ontology shared by all language conditions. Intuitively, Γ specifies which attributes may describe which entities. For example, this encodes relationships such as (hiker, climbs) as valid but (table, eats) as invalid. This separates syntax from semantics and from lexical realization: G determines which symbolic sequences are structurally well formed, while Γ

constrains which concept-property combinations are semantically valid. 

Symbolic sentence generation. A sentence is generated in three stages. First, a symbolic tem-plate z = ( v1, . . . , v n) ∈ V n is sampled from the grammar G.Second, the sampled symbols must satisfy the relevant type and ontology constraints. For exam-ple, if z describes a concept c ∈ C with a property 

p ∈ P , then (c, p ) ∈ Γ must hold. Third, the sym-bolic sentence is realized in language L by applying 

ρℓ tokenwise: ρℓ(z) =  ρℓ(v1), . . . , ρ ℓ(vn).This yields a corpora in different languages that are semantically aligned at the symbolic level but may differ arbitrarily in surface form. 

3.2 Multilingual Dataset Generation Lexical realization and lexical distance. The two languages A and B share the same abstract vocabulary V, type system τ , grammar G, and on-tology Γ, but differ in their realization functions 

ρA and ρB. We construct lexical realization by assuming languages are agglutinative (Arkadiev, 2019) and constructed from concatenation of differ-ent morphemes: language-specific prefixes, stems and suffixes. Furthermore, each language has its Figure 1: Overview of the in-vitro cross-lingual setup. Two procedurally generated languages, A and B, share the same underlying grammar, type constraints, and concept–property ontology, but differ in their lexical realizations. Cross-lingual difficulty is controlled through lexical distance d, minority-language proportion λ, tokenizer type, and tokenizer vocabulary size. A subset of minority-language lexical forms is withheld to define the masked condition 

> B†, enabling evaluation of whether models transfer shared compositional structure rather than memorizing surface forms. Subword tokenization mediates overlap between the two languages.

specific pre-defined frequency distribution of char-acters. Experimentally, we control cross-lingual lexical similarity through a scalar parameter d ∈ [0 , 1] ,where larger values of d correspond to stronger per-turbations of the latent stems and therefore greater lexical divergence between A and B. This roughly corresponds to a lexical similarity distance (Leven-shtein et al., 1966) used in linguistic studies (Dinu et al., 2023b). For example, we could have the stem "caqujna" , which leads to the two words 

"naw caqjna " and "ag caqujna " in A and B, respec-tively. The stem is being modified and each lan-guage added its own prefix. In Appendix A we provide the pseudocode for word formation and show several examples of generated sentences. We discuss limitations of this approach in the Limita-tions section. 

Training corpus mixture. Let DA and DB de-note corpora of realized training sequences in A

and B, respectively, both generated from the same underlying symbolic process. We vary the language mixture by controlling the corpus ratio |D B ||D A| = λ.We maintain B as the minority language, by ensur-ing λ ∈ (0 , 0.5] . Varying λ allows us to separate effects of lexical similarity from effects of training language proportions. 

Masked minority-language condition. To test genuine cross-lingual transfer rather than direct memorization of minority-language surface forms, we define a masked evaluation condition B†. Let 

V† ⊂ V be a subset of lexical symbols whose real-izations in language B are withheld during model training. We then define 

DB† =

n

x ∈ D B : x has ρB(v) for some v ∈ V †o

The remaining minority-language examples are 

DBseen = DB \ D B† , and the training corpus is 

Dtrain = DA ∪ D Bseen .

Crucially, the underlying symbolic structures as-sociated with V† may still be observed through 

A. Success on B†therefore requires transferring shared compositional and semantic structure, rather than relying on direct exposure to the withheld B

lexical forms. We mask 25% of the property sym-bols for B.

Tokenizer. Before model training, realized text is segmented by a subword tokenizer π :Σ∗

> A

S Σ∗ 

> B

→ V ∗, where V is a learned BPE vo-cabulary of size |V |. We consider two tokenizer-training regimes: vanilla (1 : λ) and balanced 

(1 : 1 ). In the more realistic vanilla condition, to-kenizer training uses the same language mixture as model training; in the balanced condition, to-kenizer training uses equal proportions of exam-ples from both languages and is decoupled from the model-training mixture. In particular, in both cases, we train a BPE tokenizer (Gage, 1994) with whitespace pre-tokenization on a dataset of fixed size. Since tokenization determines the atomic units through which the model observes surface form, it acts as a bottleneck between lexical real-ization and cross-lingual abstraction (Limisiewicz et al., 2023a; Petrov et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2022). In contrast to other works (De Souza et al., 2024) that use a byte tokenizer (Xue et al., 2022), we opt to vary tokenization parameters to control for the effect of subword tokenization. 

Model Training. We train a small decoder-only transformer LM on sentences generated using the procedure described above. Following Lubana et al. (2025), we construct several tasks for model train-ing and evaluation: free generation (T 0), unscram-bling (T 1) and conditional generation (T 2). For each task-language pair, we have special tokens to condition the model on which task it is supposed to perform and in which language. As such, we have a total of 6 such special tokens (3 tasks × 2languages). Examples are shown in Figure 1. 

Problem statement. Given two languages with a shared symbolic system, a lexical-distance pa-rameter d, a corpus-mixture parameter λ, and a tokenizer π, we ask: under what conditions does knowledge acquired from the majority language 

A become available in the minority language B,especially on the masked condition B†? Because 

DB† is excluded from training, performance on B†

is a direct measure of cross-lingual generalization through shared structure. 

3.3 Evaluation Setup 

Instead of simply looking at perplexity, which is an insufficient measure of downstream perfor-mance (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al., 2026), we primarily mea-sure grammaticality and type constraints satisfac-tion (Lubana et al., 2025). Our evaluation is split into intra-language performance, looking individ-ually at how performance on A and B progresses, and cross-language generalization by measuring performance on the masked lexical realizations in 

B†. We measure performance for task T1 (unscram-bling) for both maximal metric value and emer-gence step (Wei et al., 2022; Berti et al., 2025). We consider the definition of emergence by Ander-son (1972) 1, and we compute emergence step as the first training step for which a particular metric achieves a value greater than 0.02. Furthermore, we introduce a modified version of 

concept reachability (Lubana et al., 2025) that is designed to accommodate tokenized concepts. In particular, we measure Top-K Reachability. The model is conditioned with the templates " T0-A

<subject_id> is " or " T0-B <subject_id> is " and is required to generate the tokens to a valid descriptive property to the specified 

subject_id in the target language. Since such properties could be lexically realized in multiple tokens, we test whether there exists a path where every next token is in the top-K next tokens under the evolving context. We fix K = 0 .1 × | V |, to compare between tokenizer vocabulary sizes. Sub-jects are chosen such that the realized versions of the associated properties are not seen during model training for B, but are seen in A. This directly measures cross-lingual semantic transfer through lexical realizations. We provide pseudocode in Ap-pendix A. 

4 Results 

We study cross-lingual generalization along three axes: tokenizer training regime, tokenizer vocab-ulary size, and the relation between language pro-portion and lexical similarity. We first analyse the tokenizer-induced structure of the two languages, then evaluate whether this structure supports trans-fer to the masked minority-language condition B†.We then compare the emergence of different capa-bilities to determine whether masked lexical gen-eralization appears as an isolated effect or as the last stage of a broader learning trajectory. Finally, we attempt to explain masked cross-lingual transfer through tokenizer bridges .

4.1 Main results Tokenization drives cross-lingual structure ( H1). 

In Fig. 2 we show fertility (Rust et al., 2021) and vo-cabulary overlap between the two languages, across multiple language parameters (see Appendix A,       

> 1"Emergence is when quantitative changes in a system result in qualitative changes in behavior." (Anderson, 1972) (a) Tokenizer fertility for A,B, and B†based on lexical similarity, language ratio, and vocabulary size.
> (b) Vocabulary overlap increases with amount of Bdata.
> (c) Vocabulary overlap varies with lexical similarity.

Figure 2: Tokenizer fertility and vocabulary overlap under different multilingual conditions. 

Figure 3: Masked top-K reachability across training. We report Top-K reachability in the masked minority-language condition B† across tokenizer vocabulary sizes, language proportions, lexical similarities, and tokenizer training regimes. Smaller vocabularies generally yield higher masked reachability, while larger vocabularies suppress transfer by inducing more language-specific units. Balanced tokenization improves reachability in some low-resource settings, but the effect is not uniform across vocabulary sizes. 

Fig. 6 for similar plots with continuation rate as the primary metric). The tokenizer does not ex-pose the model to the two languages symmetrically. The minority language is more fragmented than the majority language. This effect is strongest at smaller language ratios, where fewer B examples are available during tokenizer training. The over-lap plots in Fig. 2 show that increasing the tok-enizer vocabulary size generally reduces shared subword structure between the two languages. As the vocabulary grows, BPE increasingly memorizes longer language-specific units rather than preserv-ing reusable pieces shared across A and B. This creates a tension: larger vocabularies reduce frag-mentation within each language, but also make the two languages less coupled at the subword level. Since transfer to B† requires the model to use in-formation acquired from A, this loss of shared substructure can harm cross-lingual generalization. 

Balanced tokenizer training is not uniformly better ( H1). In Fig. 3 we show a comparison between masked concept reachability across lan-guage proportions, tokenizer vocabulary sizes, and tokenizer types. In most settings, vanilla tokeniza-tion matches or exceeds the balanced tokenizer despite being trained on a skewed mixture. This in-dicates that the relevant factor is whether the result-ing segmentation preserves subword units that can be reused across languages. A balanced tokenizer can still fail if it allocates capacity to language-specific whole-word or near-whole-word tokens, while a vanilla tokenizer can remain useful if its skewed training distribution induces smaller shared fragments. Equal tokenizer exposure to both languages is not sufficient for transfer. What matters is the struc-ture of the induced vocabulary, especially whether the segmentation creates bridges between A and unseen lexical forms in B†. In Figure 4a, we show that maximum performance for grammaticality and type constraints satisfaction is consistently lower for the balanced tokenizer. 

Larger vocabularies suppress masked transfer. (H1) Across tokenizer regimes, increasing vocab-(a) Grammaticality and type-constraint satisfaction across proportions, lexical similarity, vocabulary size, and tokenizer type.        

> (b) Average emergence time for grammaticality and type-constraint satisfaction across languages for vanilla tokenizer and |V|= 2048 (top) and across vocabulary sizes for B†
> (bottom). Lower values indicate earlier emergence during training.
> (c) Training dynamics for validity, grammaticality, and type-constraint satisfaction in the masked condition B†. Capabil-ities emerge in a cascaded manner, before type constraints can be satisfied, the model learns to construct valid words and grammatically correct sentences.

Figure 4: Structural capabilities emerge before masked lexical transfer. The results support a staged view of cross-lingual transfer: models first acquire shared structural constraints before generalizing to unseen minority-language lexical realizations. 

ulary size tends to reduce masked concept reach-ability in B† (Fig. 3). This pattern is clearest in the reachability curves, where smaller vocabularies produce higher top-K reachability than larger vo-cabularies under otherwise comparable conditions. In our setting, the transfer problem depends on whether the model can connect unseen B lexical realizations to structure learned from A. When the vocabulary is large, BPE tends to represent words as language-specific atoms. This reduces the num-ber of shared intermediate units through which the model can generalize from one language to the other. At the extreme, a word-level vocabulary would eliminate almost all useful overlap between unrelated surface forms, leaving no subword path for transfer. Thus, vocabulary size has opposite effects on two objectives: it can make individual-language modeling more efficient while making cross-lingual abstraction harder. For masked lexical trans-fer, the useful vocabulary is not necessarily the largest one, but the one that preserves reusable sub-lexical structure. 

Language proportion controls transfer more strongly than lexical similarity ( H2, H3). The language-mixture parameter λ has a consistent ef-fect on B† performance. Increasing the amount of minority-language data improves grammaticality, type-constraint satisfaction, and masked reachabil-ity (Figure 4a). This is expected: more B data gives the model more evidence about the target language’s surface regularities, even though the specific masked lexical forms are withheld. In . By contrast, lexical similarity has a weaker and less consistent effect. Although higher similarity sometimes improves reachability, the differences across similarity values are smaller than the dif-ferences induced by tokenizer vocabulary size and language proportion. This suggests that surface similarity alone is not the dominant driver of trans-fer. The model appears to rely more on abstract structure and tokenizer-mediated overlap than on raw character-level proximity between the two re-alization functions. Similarity aids the creation of shared subword structure, but it is not by itself sufficient. Two lan-guages may be character-level similar yet poorly aligned under BPE, or less similar yet still con-nected through reusable fragments. In this setting, tokenization is the mechanism through which lexi-cal similarity becomes available to the model. 

Transfer emerges as a staged process ( H4). In Fig. 4b and 4c we show that cross-lingual gener-alization emerges in a cascade. The model first learns high-level well-formedness in the majority language A, it then improves on the observed mi-nority language B, and only later shows meaning-ful generalization to the masked condition B†. The same ordering appears across both grammatical-ity and type-constraint satisfaction. Grammatical-ity and type satisfaction rise earlier (Lubana et al., 2025), while masked reachability remains lower and more sensitive to tokenizer design. The results support a cascade view of transfer. Cross-lingual lexical generalization depends on prior acquisition of several lower-level capabili-ties: the model must learn the shared grammar, learn how the minority language realizes that gram-mar, and learn the ontology-level type constraints before it can map unseen B† forms onto concepts observed through A. Failure at any earlier stage limits masked transfer. Additional experiments are shown in Appendix A. 

4.2 Token bridges facilitate cross-lingual transfer 

Our results suggest that transfer depends on whether the tokenizer leaves masked minority-language forms connected to observed forms through shared subword fragments. For a masked item v ∈ V †, we define its tokenizer bridge as 

βπ(v) = max  

> u∈V\V †

sim  π(ρB(v)) , π (ρ(u)) ,

Where sim is normalized token overlap between tokens of the masked symbols and any other token seen during training. The average bridge strength 

ˆβπ measures how isolated masked B† forms are under the tokenizer. This quantity explains the main empirical pat-tern. Smaller vocabularies often preserve reusable fragments, while larger vocabularies merge fre-quent strings into language-specific units, reducing bridge strength. As shown in Fig. 5, ˆβπ correlates strongly with peak masked reachability ( r = 0 .62 ,

p < 0.0001 ), suggesting that masked transfer is enabled by subword paths between observed and unseen lexical realizations.       

> Figure 5: Tokenizer bridges correlate with masked cross-lingual transfer. We compare average tokenizer bridge strength ˆβπagainst peak Top-Kreachability in the masked minority-language condition B†. The posi-tive correlation suggests that masked transfer improves when the tokenizer preserves subword paths between observed and unseen lexical realizations.

5 Conclusions 

We introduced an in-vitro framework for study-ing cross-lingual generalization under controlled multilingual conditions. By procedurally generat-ing two languages that share the same ontology, grammar, and compositional structure while differ-ing in surface realization, we isolated factors that are normally entangled in natural corpora: lexical distance, language proportion, tokenizer training regime, and tokenizer vocabulary size. The masked minority-language condition further allowed us to test whether models can generalize to unseen lexi-cal forms, rather than merely memorization. Our results suggest that transfer depends on whether the tokenizer preserves reusable subword structure that connects observed and unseen forms across languages. Larger vocabularies can improve monolingual efficiency, but they may also collapse words into language-specific atoms, weakening the subword bridges needed for cross-lingual abstrac-tion. Conversely, smaller vocabularies can support transfer by keeping lexical forms decomposable into fragments that remain shared across languages. More broadly, our results support a staged view of multilingual learning. Models first acquire struc-tural competence, such as grammaticality and type constraints, before they can reliably generalize lex-ical knowledge to unseen minority-language forms. These findings imply that multilingual language models should not be trained with tokenizer design treated as a preprocessing detail. The tokenizer de-fines the interface through which surface forms be-come available to the model, and therefore shapes which cross-lingual generalizations are reachable. Limitations 

Our framework makes several simplifying assump-tions about the nature of language that limit its generalizability. First, we assume all languages conform to a recursive, context-sensitive gram-mar. This excludes languages such as (for exam-ple) Pirahã, which has been argued to lack recur-sive embedding, or languages commonly referred to Khoisan, whose structural properties fall out-side our grammatical assumptions (Everett, 2005; Witzlack-Makarevich and Nakagawa, 2019). Simi-larly, Semitic languages such as Arabic and Hebrew employ non-concatenative morphology (root-and-pattern templatic systems (McCarthy and Prince, 1990)) which our agglutinative word formation model cannot capture. We leave extension to these morphological types as future work. Second, our lexical realization model assumes words are formed by concatenating prefixes, stems, and suffixes, and that letter probabilities follow a Zipfian distribution (Zipf, 1935). This excludes fusional morphology, where morphemes merge and lose their boundaries, as well as tonal and phonological. We further abstract away from pho-netics entirely, meaning that surface similarity is measured purely at the character level rather than through phonological categories or syllable struc-ture. We instantiate our experiments with an SVO grammar, whereas natural languages exhibit sev-eral other word-order types, including SOV, VSO, and VOS. This is a limitation of the present con-figuration rather than the framework: other word orders can be supported by changing the grammar while keeping the ontology and evaluation protocol fixed. Third, we assume that both languages share ex-actly the same concept ontology and vocabulary size. This rules out phenomena such as lexical gaps, where a concept expressible in one language has no direct equivalent in another, and false friends (Bentivogli and Pianta, 2000; Dinu et al., 2023a), where surface-similar forms carry different mean-ings across languages. Natural multilingual set-tings rarely satisfy these assumptions, and the de-gree to which our findings extend to such settings remains an open question. Finally, language is inherently fluid and socially situated, and no finite generative grammar can fully capture its complexity. Our setup should there-fore be understood as a controlled approximation designed to isolate specific transfer mechanisms, rather than a faithful model of natural language acquisition or multilingual competence. 

References               

> Diana Abagyan, Alejandro R Salamanca, Andres Felipe Cruz-Salinas, Kris Cao, Hangyu Lin, Acyr Locatelli, Marzieh Fadaee, Ahmet Üstün, and Sara Hooker. 2025. One tokenizer to rule them all: Emergent language plasticity via multilingual tokenizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10766 .Orevaoghene Ahia, Sachin Kumar, Hila Gonen, Valentin Hofmann, Tomasz Limisiewicz, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Noah A Smith. 2024. Magnet: Improving the mul-tilingual fairness of language models with adaptive gradient-based tokenization. Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems , 37:47790–47814. Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. 2025. Physics of language models: Part 1, learning hierarchical lan-guage structures. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Philip W Anderson. 1972. More is different: broken symmetry and the nature of the hierarchical structure of science. Science , 177(4047):393–396. Peter M Arkadiev. 2019. Morphology in Typology: His-torical Retrospect, State of the Art, and Prospects. In Mark Aronoff, editor, Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Linguistics . Oxford University Press. Catherine Arnett, Tyler A. Chang, Stella Biderman, and Ben Bergen. 2026. Explaining and mitigating crosslingual tokenizer inequities. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems .William L. Ballard. 1980. M. A. K. Halliday, Language as social semiotic: The social interpretation of lan-guage and meaning. London: Edward Arnold, 1978. Pp. 256. Language in Society , 9(1):84–89. Luisa Bentivogli and Emanuele Pianta. 2000. Look-ing for lexical gaps. In Proceedings of the ninth EURALEX International Congress , pages 663–669. Stuttgart: Universität Stuttgart. Leonardo Berti, Flavio Giorgi, and Gjergji Kasneci. 2025. Emergent abilities in large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05788 .Terra Blevins, Hila Gonen, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022. Analyzing the mono-and cross-lingual pretraining dy-namics of multilingual language models. In Proceed-ings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3575–3590. Terra Blevins and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2022. Language contamination helps explains the cross-lingual capa-bilities of English pretrained models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 3563–3574.

Adrian Cosma, Stefan Ruseti, Emilian Radoi, and Mi-hai Dascalu. 2025. The strawberry problem: Emer-gence of character-level understanding in tokenized language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 28240–28251. Leandro De Souza, Thales Almeida, Roberto Lotufo, and Rodrigo Frassetto Nogueira. 2024. Measuring cross-lingual transfer in bytes. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 7526–7537. Liviu Dinu, Ana Uban, Alina Cristea, Anca Dinu, Ioan-Bogdan Iordache, Simona Georgescu, and Laurentiu Zoicas. 2023a. RoBoCoP: A Comprehensive RO-mance BOrrowing COgnate Package and Benchmark for Multilingual Cognate Identification. In Proceed-ings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7610–7629, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Liviu P Dinu, Ana Uban, Alina Cristea, Anca Dinu, Ioan-Bogdan Iordache, Simona Georgescu, and Lau-rentiu Zoicas. 2023b. Robocop: A comprehensive romance borrowing cognate package and benchmark for multilingual cognate identification. In Proceed-ings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7610–7629. Paola Escudero and Paul Boersma. 2004. Bridging the gap between L2 speech perception research and phonological theory. Studies in second language acquisition , 26(4):551–585. DanielL Everett. 2005. Cultural constraints on grammar and cognition in Pirahã: Another look at the design features of human language. Current anthropology ,46(4):621–646. Philip Gage. 1994. A new algorithm for data compres-sion. The C Users Journal archive , 12:23–38. Charlotte Gooskens and Femke Swarte. 2017. Linguis-tic and extra-linguistic predictors of mutual intelligi-bility between Germanic languages. Nordic Journal of Linguistics , 40(2):123–147. Charlotte Gooskens and Vincent J Van Heuven. 2021. Mutual intelligibility. Similar languages, varieties, and dialects: A computational perspective , pages 51–95. Katharina Hämmerl, Tomasz Limisiewicz, Jindˇ rich Li-bovick `y, and Alexander Fraser. 2025. Beyond literal token overlap: Token alignability for multilinguality. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Na-tions of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 756–767. Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and Sam McCandlish. 2021. Scaling laws for transfer. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01293 .Michael Y. Hu, Jackson Petty, Chuan Shi, William Mer-rill, and Tal Linzen. 2025. Between circuits and Chomsky: Pre-pretraining on formal languages im-parts linguistic biases. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 9691– 9709, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Haris Jabbar. 2023. Morphpiece: A linguistic tok-enizer for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07262 .Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Anoop Kunchukuttan, Mitesh M Khapra, Gurneet Singh, and Pushpak Bhattacharyya. 2018. Leveraging ortho-graphic similarity for multilingual neural translitera-tion. Transactions of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics , 6:303–316. Vladimir I Levenshtein and 1 others. 1966. Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. In Soviet physics doklady , volume 10, pages 707–710. Soviet Union. Tomasz Limisiewicz, Jiˇ rí Balhar, and David Mareˇ cek. 2023a. Tokenization impacts multilingual language modeling: Assessing vocabulary allocation and over-lap across languages. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 5661–5681, Toronto, Canada. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Tomasz Limisiewicz, Dan Malkin, and Gabriel Stanovsky. 2023b. You can have your data and bal-ance it too: Towards balanced and efficient multilin-gual models. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Research in Computational Linguistic Typology and Multilingual NLP , pages 1–11. Ziming Liu, Yizhou Liu, Eric J Michaud, Jeff Gore, and Max Tegmark. 2025. Physics of skill learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12391 .Ekdeep Singh Lubana, Kyogo Kawaguchi, Robert Dick, and Hidenori Tanaka. 2025. A percolation model of emergence: Analyzing transformers trained on a formal language. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 37402–37460. Dan Malkin, Tomasz Limisiewicz, and Gabriel Stanovsky. 2022. A balanced data approach for eval-uating cross-lingual transfer: Mapping the linguistic blood bank. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 4903–4915. John McCarthy and Alan Prince. 1990. Prosodic mor-phology and templatic morphology. In Perspectives on Arabic linguistics II: papers from the second an-nual symposium on Arabic linguistics , pages 1–54. John Benjamins Pub. Co. Amsterdam. Eric Michaud, Ziming Liu, Uzay Girit, and Max Tegmark. 2023. The quantization model of neural scaling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:28699–28722. Isabel Papadimitriou and Dan Jurafsky. 2020. Learn-ing Music Helps You Read: Using transfer to study linguistic structure in language models. In Proceed-ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 6829–6839, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Isabel Papadimitriou and Dan Jurafsky. 2023. Inject-ing structural hints: Using language models to study inductive biases in language learning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 8402–8413, Singapore. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Vaidehi Patil, Partha Talukdar, and Sunita Sarawagi. 2022. Overlap-based vocabulary generation im-proves cross-lingual transfer among related lan-guages. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 219–233. Aleksandar Petrov, Emanuele La Malfa, Philip Torr, and Adel Bibi. 2023. Language Model Tokenizers Intro-duce Unfairness Between Languages. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 36963–36990. Curran Associates, Inc. Phillip Rust, Jonas Pfeiffer, Ivan Vuli´ c, Sebastian Ruder, and Iryna Gurevych. 2021. How good is your tok-enizer? on the monolingual performance of multilin-gual language models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Confer-ence on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3118–3135. Noam Shazeer. 2020. Glu variants improve transformer. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05202 .Chihiro Taguchi and Richard Sproat. 2026. Creating ConLangs to Probe the Metalinguistic Grammatical Knowledge of LLMs. Preprint , arXiv:2510.07591. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30. Petar Veliˇ ckovi´ c, Federico Barbero, Christos Perivolaropoulos, Simon Osindero, and Razvan Pascanu. 2026. Perplexity Cannot Always Tell Right from Wrong. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.22950 .Hetong Wang, Pasquale Minervini, and Edoardo Ponti. 2024. Probing the emergence of cross-lingual align-ment during LLM training. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 ,pages 12159–12173. Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022. Emer-gent abilities of large language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research . Survey Certifica-tion. Chris Wendler, Veniamin Veselovsky, Giovanni Monea, and Robert West. 2024. Do Llamas Work in English? On the Latent Language of Multilingual Transform-ers. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 15366–15394, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Alena Witzlack-Makarevich and Hirosi Nakagawa. 2019. Linguistic Features and Typologies in Lan-guages Commonly Referred to as ‘Khoisan’ , page 382–416. Cambridge Handbooks in Language and Linguistics. Cambridge University Press. Linting Xue, Aditya Barua, Noah Constant, Rami Al-Rfou, Sharan Narang, Mihir Kale, Adam Roberts, and Colin Raffel. 2022. ByT5: Towards a token-free future with pre-trained byte-to-byte models. Transac-tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics , 10:291–306. Biao Zhang and Rico Sennrich. 2019. Root mean square layer normalization. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32. Yiran Zhao, Wenxuan Zhang, Guizhen Chen, Kenji Kawaguchi, and Lidong Bing. 2024. How do Large Language Models Handle Multilingualism? In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems .George Kingsley Zipf. 1935. The Psycho-Biology of Language: An Introduction to Dynamic Philology .Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA. 

A Appendix 

Figure 6: Tokenizer fragmentation continuation rate for 

A, B, and B†. The continuation rate measures how of-ten words are represented by multi-token segmentations. Higher continuation rates indicate greater fragmentation. The masked condition follows the minority-language tokenization pattern, showing that the model must gen-eralize through the same subword interface used for observed B forms. Table 1: Paired sentence realizations from the synthetic bilingual corpus chosen to emphasize visible overlap under the 2048 tokenizer. Each row comes from the same underlying symbolic sentence realized in A and B. Shared subtokens receive the same color in both languages. Legend: shared shared subtoken; A-only A-only subtoken; B-only 

B-only subtoken; <eos> control token. 

Language A Language B                                                                                                                                                             

> Labzvae fekoc xucbopzhbyiw <eos> Labzvae foc enuxxucbopzhiviwbig <eos> Nentmufkesi fekoc bbyadaec beqcqicijobzzel lawj beqcmcb eose oe voyfeabwbadwi <eos> Nentmufkesi foc guhibyodeil qicijobzzel lasj mefb fape vovyufefebwab <eos> Ditlethdehi fekoc ikadcizmohbbgi <eos> Ditlethdehi foc ikadcezmohb <eos> apyiefxnbac fekoc dxakofdtanbit <eos> iynldwi foc enuxdxakofdtanfgatbig <eos> Gecqulborzcpo fekoc occoabodbac uxvavrawgjadom <eos> Gecqulborzcpo foc accobabodbac vavrewgjadom <eos> Segkligbmieq fekoc ogaarpcdwi ejiddvudom <eos> Segkligbmieq foc gugiaralapcbac ejiddvudom <eos> oibfisa hiikco fekoc occoabodbac biirkglievdom lawj fekoc bbyadaec ierfjoobbgi <eos> abfesadwi aihkco foc accobabodbac babkgaetvtievdom lasj foc guhibyodeil fiqeazaoerfjoob <eos> Gecqulborzcpo fekoc oabbabu beqceduelgegr <eos> Gecqulborzcpo foc guabzaudwi enuxeduelgegr <eos> Nentmufkesi fekoc bbyadaec beqcqicijobzzel lawj beqcmcb eose oe voyfeabwbadwi <eos> Nentmufkesi foc guhibyodeil qicijobzzel lasj mefb fape vovyufefebwab <eos> oasifsgide oddwi lawj Jeralogutc fekoc ruao iflohokzsidi <eos> apahbaqbegodwi obac lasj Jeralogutc foc ae hcohokzsidvei <eos> Labzvae fekoc xucbopzhbyiw <eos> Labzvae foc enuxxucbopzhiviwbig <eos> Gecqulborzcpo lawj tciaqtabac apenjeca fekoc aphap uxvhuedqukihle <eos> Gecqulborzcpo lasj kadta aevnjeucdwi foc gunoap vheduqkihkale <eos> Gecqulborzcpo fekoc uxehokmoruhhbgi <eos> Gecqulborzcpo foc ehivmoruhhbig <eos> Gecqulborzcpo fekoc oabbabu beqceduelgegr <eos> Gecqulborzcpo foc guabzaudwi enuxeduelgegr <eos> Nentmufkesi fekoc kowcenrdom <eos> Nentmufkesi foc fiqeazaoowcenrdom <eos> Segkligbmieq fekoc ibogbmavuvce <eos> Segkligbmieq foc bogbpavutascebig <eos>

A.1 Implementation details 

We keep the number of concepts fixed, correspond-ing to 100 entities, 10 classes to divide over, 460 de-scriptive properties, 40 descriptive values, 100 rela-tive properties (see (Lubana et al., 2025)). When forming symbolic sentences, we sampled concepts uniformly. Words are created using the following syllable patterns: "CVC", "CCV", "CVCC", "CV", "VC", "V". The letter probabilities follow a Zipfian distribution (Zipf, 1935) and are slightly different for A and B, according to the lexical distance d.The average word length is nine characters. The PCSG used to generate sentences is pre-sented in 7. Each symbolic vocabulary item is assigned a latent proto-stem and two surface real-izations, one per language, obtained by applying language-specific cognate transformations and op-tional category-conditioned affixes; symbolic se-quences are then realized by simple token substitu-tion into the selected language (Algorithm 1. Here, 

s denotes a latent proto-stem, c(v) is the grammat-ical category of symbolic entry v, π and σ are an optional prefix and suffix, and ∥ denotes string con-catenation. The function DERIVE COGNATE (s, ℓ )

produces a language-specific variant of the shared stem s for language ℓ.Each configuration is trained across nine seeds: three seeds for the dataset creation and three seeds for the model training. Model is a small trans-former decoder (Vaswani et al., 2017) consisting of 4 layers, a model dimension of 256, using SwiGLU (Shazeer, 2020) and RMSNorm (Zhang and Sen-nrich, 2019) layers. We used a batch size of 64, learning rate of 0.0001, adapted using a cosine de-cay with linear warmup of 256 steps. We used AdamW optimizer (Kingma and Ba, 2015) with 

β1 = 0 .9, β2 = 0 .95 , ε = 10 −10 and weight de-cay of 0.01. Context size was set at 256 tokens, enough such that sequences are not truncated. We train each model for 10000 steps.We train a total of 700 models. A training run takes around one hour. Model training was performed on a consumer NVIDIA RTX 3060 GPU, making our experiments Algorithm 1 Bilingual lexical realization. 

Require: Symbolic vocabulary V; symbolic se-quence X = ( x1, . . . , x n); language set L =

{A, B }; category function c : V → C 

Ensure: Bilingual lexicon M with entries M [v, ℓ ]

for v ∈ V and ℓ ∈ L  

> 1:

function MAKE WORD (s, c, ℓ ) 

> 2:

s(ℓ) ← DERIVE COGNATE (s, ℓ ) 

> 3:

π ← SAMPLE PREFIX (c, ℓ ) 

> 4:

σ ← SAMPLE SUFFIX (c, ℓ ) 

> 5:

return π ∥ s(ℓ) ∥ σ 

> 6:

end function  

> 7:

for all v ∈ V do  

> 8:

sample latent stem s 

> 9:

for all ℓ ∈ L do  

> 10:

M [v, ℓ ] ← MAKE WORD (s, c (v), ℓ ) 

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

return M

replicable on consumer hardware. 

Top-K Reachability Algorithm 2 checks whether any target sequence is reachable when decoding is restricted to tokens that are both valid trie continu-ations and present in the model’s top-k predictions at each step. By batching all active prefixes in the frontier, it evaluates many partial candidates with a single forward pass per decoding step. 

A.2 Additional experiments. 

In Figure 8 we should training dynamics using a balanced tokenizer. Further in Figures 9 and 10 we show emergence steps across languages for vanilla and balanced tokenizers, respectively. In Figures 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 we show the maximum performance reached across vanilla and balanced tokenizers. 

Algorithm 2 REACHABLE TOP K

Require: model f , prompt x, target sequences S,top-k value k, horizon H

Ensure: whether any target sequence is reachable  

> 1:

T ← BUILD TRIE (S) 

> 2:

F ← { (r, ϵ )} ▷ root node and empty prefix  

> 3:

for t = 1 to H do  

> 4:

if F = ∅ then return false  

> 5:

end if  

> 6:

Batch all contexts [x; p] for (n, p) ∈ F  

> 7:

Compute top-k next-token sets K(n, p) 

> 8:

F′ ← ∅  

> 9:

for all (n, p) ∈ F do  

> 10:

for all u ∈ Children( n) ∩ K (n, p) do  

> 11:

n′ ← Next( n, u ) 

> 12:

if n′ is terminal then return true  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

add (n′, p∥u) to F′ 

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

F ← DEDUPLICATE (F′) 

> 18:

end for  

> 19:

return false                                      

> Production grammar
> S-> Ph NP VP EndOfSeq [1.0] | Ph NP VP SepSeq S [0.0] NP -> subjectID [0.8] | NP Conj NP [0.2] VP -> descPreP descV [0.4] | relV relPreP relNP [0.4] | VP Conj VP [0.2] relNP -> objectID [0.7] | objectID Conj relNP[0.3] Ph -> '[P] '[1.0] subjectID -> 'subjectID '[1.0] objectID -> 'objectID '[1.0] relV -> 'relV '[1.0] descV -> 'descV '[1.0] descPreP -> 'descPreP '[1.0] relPreP -> 'relPreP '[1.0] Conj -> 'conj '[1.0] SepSeq -> '<sep> '[1.0] EndOfSeq -> '<eos> '[1.0]

Figure 7: Probabilistic grammar used to generate sym-bolic sequences. The grammar defines the abstract sentence structure shared by both languages before language-specific lexical realization. This shared sym-bolic layer allows us to isolate transfer through surface forms while holding syntax, type constraints, and ontol-ogy fixed. Figure 8: Training dynamics for validity, grammati-cality, and type-constraint satisfaction in the masked condition B† using a balanced tokenizer. 

Figure 9: Average emergence time for grammaticality and type-constraint satisfaction across languages for vanilla tokenizer and |V | ∈ { 2048 , 4096 , 8192 }. Lower values indicate earlier emergence during training. 

Figure 10: Average emergence time for grammaticality and type-constraint satisfaction across languages for bal-anced tokenizer and |V | ∈ { 2048 , 4096 , 8192 }. Lower values indicate earlier emergence during training. 

Figure 11: Grammaticality in the vanilla tokenizer set-ting across vocabulary sizes, language ratios, and lex-ical similarities. Grammaticality improves with addi-tional minority-language data and is comparatively ro-bust across lexical similarity conditions, indicating that structural well-formedness can be learned even when masked lexical transfer remains limited. Figure 12: Grammaticality in the balanced tokenizer set-ting across vocabulary sizes, language ratios, and lexical similarities. Balanced tokenizer training reduces some minority-language asymmetries, but its effect depends on vocabulary size. The results show that balanced to-kenizer exposure does not automatically translate into uniformly better structural competence. 

Figure 13: Type-constraint satisfaction in the vanilla tokenizer setting. Despite skewed tokenizer training, models acquire type-level competence across a range of conditions. The remaining gap between B and B† indi-cates that satisfying abstract constraints is easier than transferring those constraints to unseen target-language surface forms. 

Figure 14: Type-constraint satisfaction in the balanced tokenizer setting. Type-level competence improves with greater minority-language proportion and varies across vocabulary sizes. Compared with masked reachability, type satisfaction emerges more reliably, suggesting that semantic constraints are learned before they become usable for generating unseen minority-language lexical forms. 

Figure 15: Masked Top-K reachability in the vanilla tokenizer setting. Reachability is highest at smaller vo-cabulary sizes and generally decreases as vocabulary size increases. This supports the view that larger BPE vocabularies can harm cross-lingual transfer by replac-ing reusable subword fragments with language-specific lexical units. Figure 16: Masked Top-K reachability in the balanced tokenizer setting. Balanced tokenization can improve transfer when the minority-language proportion is small, but the benefit depends strongly on vocabulary size. Larger vocabularies again reduce reachability, showing that equal tokenizer exposure is not sufficient when the induced vocabulary fails to preserve shared subword structure.