Title: Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech: Arabic, Persian, and German

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.19069v3

Published Time: Mon, 25 May 2026 01:19:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
May 2026 

# Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech: Arabic, Persian, and German 

Sajjad Abdoli *1 , Ghassan Al-Sumaidaee *2 , Clayton W. Taylor *3 , Ahmad ElShiekh *4 , Ahmed Rashad *

> *

Perle AI sajjad@perle.ai ghassan.al-sumaidaee@perle.ai clayton@perle.ai mad.elshiekh@perle.ai ahmed@perle.ai 

Code-switching — the natural alternation between two languages within a single utterance — remains one of the most challenging and under-studied conditions for automatic speech recognition (ASR). We present a benchmark evaluating five commercial ASR providers across four language pairs: Egyptian Arabic–English, Saudi Arabic (Najdi/Hijazi)–English, Persian (Farsi)–English, and German–English, comprising 300 samples per pair selected by a two-stage pipeline combining heuristic filtering with a GPT-4o and Gemini 1.5 Pro ensemble scorer, reducing LLM costs by ≈91%. We evaluate on both WER and BERTScore, showing that while both metrics agree on the ordinal ranking of systems for all Arabic and Persian pairs ( τ = 1 .0), WER inflates the magnitude of quality gaps by approximately 3 ×

by penalising semantically correct transliteration choices. ElevenLabs Scribe v2 achieves the lowest WER (13.2% overall) and leads on BERTScore (0.936 overall). Difficulty-stratified analysis reveals performance gaps masked by aggregate averages, and BERT embedding projections confirm semantic proximity between reference and hypothesis despite surface-level script differences. The dataset is publicly available at https://huggingface.co/datasets/Perle-ai/ASR_Code_Switch .

Keywords: automatic speech recognition, code-switching, multilingual ASR, benchmark, WER, BERTScore, Arabic, Persian, German 

# 1. Introduction 

Multilingual speakers rarely confine themselves to a single language. An Egyptian software engineer on a video call might say: 

simple لܝިﻥ ሒᇼ؇ਐಸ style ﺍܳـ صොໍາ ؇َﺃ 

(“I like my style to be simple”) 

A Persian developer describing a technical problem might say: 

ﺩﺍﺭﻩ bug উ႓ၖࣖ࣎ ڎ༥ feature દતﺍ 

(“This new feature has a lot of bugs”) 

A Saudi product manager addressing their team: 

> 1

Corresponding author: sajjad@perle.ai 

> 2

ORCID: 0000-0002-5536-0252 

> 3

ORCID: 0009-0006-6478-8994 

> 4

ORCID: 0009-0001-6837-6202 © 2026 Perle.ai. All rights reserved. 1

> arXiv:2605.19069v3 [cs.CL] 22 May 2026 May 2026

update ﺍܳـ shipﺯﻡ َـ৖৑ ،ﻩ୍ଲً deadline ﺍܳـ 

(“The deadline is tomorrow, we need to ship the update”) 

These utterances are representative of everyday speech in multilingual workplaces across the Middle East and beyond. This phenomenon is known as code-switching (CS): the fluid, unconscious alternation between two languages within a single utterance, sentence, or even morphological unit Myers-Scotton 1997; Auer 2013. Despite its prevalence, code-switching remains largely absent from commercial ASR evaluation. Providers typically report WER on clean, monolingual held-out sets. This tells practitioners almost nothing about how a system will behave when deployed for genuinely multilingual populations — which today includes a substantial portion of global knowledge workers in the Middle East, South Asia, and Europe. This paper makes the following contributions: (i) A curated benchmark of 1,200 code-switching utterances (300 per language pair) across four linguisti-cally diverse language pairs, selected by a reproducible two-stage pipeline. (ii) A comparative evaluation of five commercial ASR systems on this benchmark, reported on both WER and BERTScore. (iii) An argument and empirical demonstration that BERTScore is a more reliable primary metric than WER for Arabic and Persian code-switching due to transliteration variance. While WER and BERTScore agree on the ordinal ranking of systems ( τ = 1 .0 for all Arabic and Persian pairs), WER systematically overstates the magnitude of performance differences by penalising semantically correct transliteration choices as errors. (iv) A BERT embedding space analysis providing direct visual evidence that semantically equivalent utter-ances are proximate regardless of script convention. 

# 2. Related Work 

Code-switching has been studied extensively in linguistics Gumperz 1982; Poplack 1980, but work on ASR for code-switching lags considerably behind monolingual recognition. Early work focused on language identification preceding recognition Shia et al. 2004, while more recent approaches integrate end-to-end models with multilingual training data Watanabe et al. 2017; Toshniwal et al. 2018. Benchmark datasets for code-switching ASR include SEAME (Singaporean Mandarin–English, Lyu et al. 2010, the Miami Bangor corpus Deuchar et al. 2014, and the MUCS shared task corpora Diwan et al. 2021. More recently, Xie et al. (2026) introduced SwitchLingua, a large-scale multilingual and multi-ethnic code-switching benchmark with synthesized text and recorded speech across 12 languages. Our work is complementary but differs in focus: rather than constructing a broad multilingual dataset, we evaluate commercial ASR systems on language pairs and regional varieties that remain underrepresented in existing benchmarks, including Persian–English and multiple Arabic–English settings spanning Egyptian and Saudi dialectal speech. Arabic–English code-switching corpora are rarer; notable exceptions include work by Hamed, Elmahdy, and Abdennadher (2017) and the ArzEn corpus Hamed, Vu, and Abdennadher 2020. Persian– English and Gulf Arabic–English code-switching datasets for ASR evaluation remain scarce. Evaluation is another recurring challenge in code-switching ASR. WER is the dominant ASR evalua-tion metric Makhoul et al. 1999, computing the minimum edit distance between reference and hypothesis word sequences Levenshtein 1966. Its limitations for code-switching include insensitivity to script-equivalent translations and no partial credit for semantically correct transcriptions in a different script convention. BERTScore Zhang et al. 2019 addresses some of these limitations by computing token-level cosine similarity in a pretrained embedding space. For multilingual evaluation, bert-base-multilingual-cased Devlin et al. 2019 maps text from 104 languages into a shared latent space, enabling meaningful comparison across scripts. Commercial ASR evaluation is also underdeveloped for code-switching. Several studies have benchmarked commercial ASR providers on specific domains or noise conditions Radford et al. 2023; Baevski et al. 2020, but systematic comparison on code-switching audio across multiple language pairs is, to our knowledge, absent from the literature.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 2May 2026

# 3. Benchmark Construction 

3.1. Source Datasets 

Our source datasets are conversational transcripts collected from real-world multilingual speakers across four language pairs: Saudi Arabic–English, Egyptian Arabic–English, Persian (Farsi)–English, and German– English. The candidate-selection counts are reported in Table 2. Each dataset is reduced to a final benchmark split of 300 challenging utterances. Each sample consists of a single utterance, a reference transcript, and a corresponding audio filename. The final 300 samples for each language pair are selected from the Stage 2 scored pool by ranking rows according to LLM Ensemble_Score , with H_Score used as a tie-breaker. The sample-selection protocol is detailed below. 

3.2. Voice Actor Recruitment and Recording 

The audio recordings paired with each transcript were produced by native speakers recruited through our internal contributor network. For each language pair, we sourced speakers who satisfied three criteria: (i) native or near-native fluency in the target non-English language, with the relevant regional variety (Egyp-tian, Najdi/Hijazi, Tehran-variety Farsi, or standard German); (ii) professional or conversational fluency in English sufficient to produce natural intra-sentential switching rather than read-aloud pronunciation; and (iii) familiarity with the technical and professional registers that dominate the corpus, since natural delivery of terms such as deployment , bottleneck , or deadline embedded in a matrix-language utterance requires the speaker to use them habitually rather than to decode them on the page. Speakers were given the reference transcripts and instructed to deliver each utterance conversationally rather than as a read performance, with latitude to adjust prosody, hesitations, and minor disfluencies to match how they would naturally produce the utterance in context. Recordings were captured in quiet indoor environments using consumer-grade headset or USB microphones, mirroring the acoustic conditions of the remote-work scenarios that the benchmark is intended to represent rather than studio-quality conditions that would overstate ASR performance in deployment. This decision was informed by prior corpus collection work where studio-grade audio was observed to materially understate the error rates that the same systems exhibited on real customer traffic; matching the recording environment to the deployment environment is a precondition for benchmark results that transfer. All contributors consented to the use of their recordings for research and benchmarking purposes under our standard contributor agreement. Per-speaker demographic details and recruitment channel specifics are withheld to protect contributor privacy. Figure 1 shows the distribution of semantic topics across the 300 benchmark samples for each language pair, classified by GPT-4o using a topic taxonomy derived inductively from the corpus itself (no predefined categories). The taxonomy was discovered by presenting a stratified sample of 240 transcripts to the model and asking it to identify recurring semantic domains; all 1,200 transcripts were then classified against the resulting label set. 

3.3. Stage 1: Heuristic Filter Design scope. Stage 1 is explicitly designed for Arabic–English and Persian–English pairs. Its core signals rely on the presence of two visually distinct scripts in the same utterance: Arabic/Persian Unicode characters (U+0600–U+06FF) and Latin characters (A–Z, a–z). German and English share the Latin script entirely, so script-based signals are structurally inapplicable to the German dataset. The implications of this design choice are discussed at the end of this subsection. 

Scoring signals. Each transcript receives a composite H_Score in [0 , 10] from five weighted signals.   

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 3May 2026
> Figure 1: Topic distribution of the 300 benchmark samples per language pair, classified by GPT-4o using an inductively derived taxonomy. Topics reflect the actual semantic domains of the code-switching speech corpora.

Script mix ratio (w = 0 .30 ). Let na be the count of Arabic/Persian Unicode characters and nl the count of Latin characters. The raw mix ratio is: 

m = min( na, n l)

na + nl

(1) This ratio peaks at m = 0 .50 when the two scripts appear in equal proportion, but corpus inspection of our Arabic–English and Persian–English datasets showed that the median script-mix ratio in genuinely code-switched utterances falls around 0.35 : speakers typically embed shorter English terms into longer Arabic or Persian sentences, producing an asymmetric mix rather than a 50/50 split. Setting m∗ = 0 .35 therefore aligns the peak of the signal with the empirically most common mixing pattern in the data: 

hmix = min 

( mm∗ , 1

)

× 10 (2) A transcript with m < 0.35 scores proportionally; one with m ≥ 0.35 scores the maximum 10. 

Token alternation rate (w = 0 .30 ). Each token is classified as arabic , latin , or mixed based on the majority character class. Let k be the number of consecutive token pairs that switch between Arabic/Persian  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 4May 2026

and Latin script. Then: 

halt = min 

( kn/ 2 , 1

)

× 10 (3) where n is the total token count. The denominator n/ 2 represents the theoretical maximum number of switches in a sentence of n tokens (every adjacent pair alternates scripts). A switch every two tokens gives the maximum score of 10. 

Morphological blend detection (w = 0 .20 ). Regular expressions detect cross-language morphological fusion: the Arabic definite article ﺍﻝ prefixed to a Latin word ( e.g. , ﺍܳـmeeting ), English stems bearing Arabic plural or adjectival suffixes ( e.g. , developers-દઊ ), and English stems with German derivational suffixes ( e.g. ,Startup-ung ). Let b be the total regex hits: 

hmorph = min 

( b

3 , 1

)

× 10 (4) The ceiling of b = 3 was chosen empirically: manual inspection of 300 randomly sampled transcripts showed that utterances with three or more distinct morphological blending events are already at the upper tail of complexity, and further blending events add negligible additional discriminative value. An utterance with one hit scores 3.3, two hits scores 6.7, and three or more hits scores the maximum 10. 

Length penalty (w = 0 .10 ). Transcripts with fewer than five tokens cannot exhibit meaningful switching and receive hlen = 0 :

hlen =



0 if n < 5min 

( n − 520 , 1

)

× 10 otherwise (5) The ceiling of 25 tokens ( n−5 = 20 ) reflects the 90th percentile of utterance length in our datasets; transcripts at or above this length receive the full score of 10. 

Vocabulary diversity (w = 0 .10 ). Let |vocab | denote the number of unique tokens in the transcript (the type count), and n the total token count (the token count). Their ratio |vocab |/n is the type–token ratio (TTR), a standard measure of lexical richness. A TTR of 1.0 means every token is unique (maximally diverse); a TTR near 0 indicates heavy repetition. The threshold 0.7 was selected as the 75th-percentile TTR in our source corpora: most naturally diverse code-switched utterances exceed this value, while repetitive or formulaic utterances fall below it: 

hvocab = min 

( |vocab |/n 

0.7 , 1

)

× 10 (6) The composite H_Score is: 

H = 0 .30 hmix + 0 .30 halt + 0 .20 hmorph + 0 .10 hlen + 0 .10 hvocab (7) Table 1 shows H_Score computation for two representative samples from the Egyptian Arabic–English dataset, illustrating how the five signals combine. Sample A (H_Score 8.37) exhibits dense mixing with six script alternations, multiple Arabic-prefixed English tokens, and a near-maximal mix ratio, placing it in the top difficulty quartile. Sample B (H_Score 5.54) contains only one morphological blend and fewer switches, placing it in the second quartile. 

Per-dataset candidate selection. Table 2 shows how many rows are passed from Stage 1 to Stage 2 per dataset. For Saudi, a random pre-sample of 5,000 rows is drawn from the 27,190-row source corpus before heuristic scoring to manage computational cost.    

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 5May 2026
> Table 1: H_Score of examples (Egyptian Arabic–English). Sample A is a densely code-switched tech utterance; Sample B is a lighter, shorter mix.

Sample A Sample B 

Transcript ﺃَ؇ ނ؇لژ ﺇﻥ ﺍܳـ UX flow ﺩﻩ ੼ ොٺ؇ﺝ redesign، ﺍܳـ screens ﺍܳـ ඔ൹ً confuseـਃಸ user ﻩ୍ଲً mobile ﺍܳـ আॻ༟ ؇ਃಸ ﺍّݱܭ 

Translation “I think this UX flow needs a redesign, the user gets confused between the screens” “Call me on the mobile tomorrow” 

n (tokens) 14 7

na (Ar. chars) 42 19 

nl (Lat. chars) 31 6

m = min /sum 31 /73 = 0 .42 6/25 = 0 .24 

hmix min(0 .42 /0.35 , 1) × 10 = 10 .0 min(0 .24 /0.35 , 1) × 10 = 6 .9

k (switches) 6 2

halt min(6 /7, 1) × 10 = 8 .6 min(2 /3.5, 1) × 10 = 5 .7

b (morph hits) 2 ( ﺍܳـUX , ﺍܳـuser ) 1 ( ﺍܳـmobile )

hmorph min(2 /3, 1) × 10 = 6 .7 min(1 /3, 1) × 10 = 3 .3

hlen min(9 /20 , 1) × 10 = 4 .5 min(2 /20 , 1) × 10 = 1 .0

|vocab |/n 14 /14 = 1 .0 7/7 = 1 .0

hvocab min(1 .0/0.7, 1) × 10 = 10 .0 min(1 .0/0.7, 1) × 10 = 10 .0

H_Score 0.30(10 .0) + 0.30(8 .6) + 0.20(6 .7) +0.10(4 .5) + 0 .10(10 .0) = 8.37 

0.30(6 .9)+0 .30(5 .7)+0 .20(3 .3)+0 .10(1 .0)+ 0.10(10 .0) = 5.54  

> Table 2: Stage 1 candidate selection parameters.

Dataset Source Pre-sample LLM Candidates Filter active? 

Saudi 27,190 5,000 1,500 Yes ( ∼70% reduction) Egyptian 9,153 none 1,200 Yes ( ∼87% reduction) Persian 1,934 none 600 Yes ( ∼69% reduction) German 860 none 860 No — all rows forwarded 

Stage 1 and the German–English pair. The heuristic filter is designed for Arabic–English and Persian– English, where code-switching is structurally visible as an alternation between two distinct Unicode script blocks. For German–English, both languages share the Latin script, so hmix = 0 and halt = 0 identically for all samples. The effective weight sum is therefore Weff = 0 .40 and H ∈ [0 , 4] rather than [0 , 10] . This compressed range has no practical consequence since all 860 German rows are forwarded to Stage 2 unconditionally, and H_Score serves only as a tie-breaker rather than a selection threshold. Consumers of H_Score as a standalone difficulty indicator should note that German scores are not directly comparable to Arabic or Persian scores on the [0 , 10] scale. The substantive work for German–English is done entirely by the LLM ensemble in Stage 2. GPT-4o and Gemini 1.5 Pro assess German–English code-switching on its own linguistic merits — intra-sentential lexical switching, German derivational morphology applied to English stems ( e.g. , downloaden , gedownloadet ), register mixing between colloquial German and English technical vocabulary, and phonological ambiguity at the German–English boundary — without any dependence on script detection. The LLM ensemble is therefore the appropriate and sufficient tool for this language pair, and the quality of the resulting German benchmark reflects Stage 2 scoring alone.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 6May 2026

3.4. Stage 2: LLM Ensemble Scoring 

Stage 1 captures surface-level structural difficulty for Arabic and Persian pairs and forwards all German rows unconditionally. Stage 2 captures semantic and phonological complexity that requires genuine linguistic reasoning for all four language pairs. Each Stage 1 candidate is sent concurrently to GPT-4o and Gemini 1.5 Pro (one thread per model). Each model scores the transcript across six linguistic dimensions on a 1–10 scale (Table 3), returns verbatim evidence per dimension, up to five annotated hard tokens with one-sentence ASR risk explanations, and a summary sentence.  

> Table 3: LLM scoring dimensions (Stage 2).

Dimension What it captures 

Morphological blending Cross-language affixes on foreign-language stems Switching density Intra-sentential language switch frequency Slang and register mix Colloquial dialect forms meeting domain-specific jargon Phonological ambiguity Tokens acoustically plausible in either language Named entity/jargon density Brands, technical terms, proper nouns in mixed context Script/orthographic complexity Romanisation inconsistency, mixed-script tokens The Ensemble_Score is the average of both models’ overall_score values (1–10). Using two inde-pendent models reduces the influence of any single model’s idiosyncratic biases; rows where the two models disagree by more than 3 points on any dimension are flagged for inspection. The final 300 samples per language pair are ranked by Ensemble_Score (descending), with H_Score as a tie-breaker. The pipeline is fully resumable via SQLite checkpoint. This two-stage design reduces LLM API calls by approximately 91% compared to scoring all rows directly for Arabic and Persian pairs; for German, all rows are LLM-scored since the dataset size makes exhaustive scoring practical at negligible cost. 

# 4. Evaluation Methodology 

4.1. Systems Evaluated 

We evaluate five commercial ASR systems accessed via their production APIs in May 2026. Table 8 summarises the models; Table 9 lists the exact API parameters used in our benchmark. 

Key architectural distinctions. The five systems represent three different strategies for handling code-switching: • Language-agnostic end-to-end models (ElevenLabs Scribe v2, Google Chirp 3): ElevenLabs Scribe v2 is a state-of-the-art speech recognition model supporting 90+ languages with smart language de-tection — no language code is required; the model infers the spoken language directly from the au-dio ElevenLabs 2025. Google Chirp 3 is the latest generation of Google’s multilingual ASR-specific generative models, providing enhanced transcription accuracy with automatic language detection; setting 

language_codes=["auto"] instructs the model to “automatically infer and transcribe in the most preva-lent language” without any candidate list Google Cloud 2025. Neither model is given a language hint in our benchmark, making this the most demanding configuration for code-switching: the model must resolve script and language identity from acoustic evidence alone, without the disambiguation advantage of a pre-specified locale set. • LLM-integrated decoder (OpenAI gpt-4o-transcribe): the model builds upon the GPT-4o architecture and is extensively pre-trained on specialised audio-centric datasets OpenAI 2025. Rather than the con-ventional Whisper-style encoder-decoder trained primarily on supervised speech data, gpt-4o-transcribe adopts what OpenAI describes as a “reinforcement learning (RL)-heavy paradigm” for transcription, combined with extensive midtraining on diverse, high-quality audio OpenAI 2025. This training regime  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 7May 2026

enables the model to leverage the GPT-4o backbone’s language priors to resolve ambiguity at script and language boundaries — a property particularly relevant for code-switching audio where acoustic evidence alone is insufficient to determine the correct script convention. No language hint is supplied in our benchmark configuration. • Segment-level language identification (Azure Speech CLID): a discrete language identification (LID) classifier runs at each recognition segment boundary, re-estimating the active language before the acous-tic decoder produces the transcript for that segment. Per Microsoft’s documentation, this architecture 

“doesn’t support changing languages within the same sentence” : intra-sentential switches are invisible to the LID layer and are decoded under whichever language was detected at the segment onset Microsoft Corporation 2024. We set SpeechServiceConnection_LanguageIdMode=Continuous explicitly via the Python SDK, which triggers re-identification at each segment boundary rather than once per session (the 

AtStart default); this alone improved mean WER by 2.0 percentage points across all four language pairs. • Unified multilingual decoder with implicit language handling (Deepgram Nova-3): unlike Azure’s two-stage design, Nova-3 performs no explicit LID step. Per Deepgram’s technical documentation, the model “operates as a truly unified multilingual speech recognition system” that “naturally emits transcrip-tions following the speaker’s language switches, without relying on explicit routing or language-specific mechanisms” Deepgram 2025a. This is achieved through “a multi-stage training process that combines synthetic code-switched data at massive scale with carefully curated real-world datasets” Deepgram 2025a, covering 10 languages: English, Spanish, French, German, Hindi, Russian, Portuguese, Japanese, Italian, and Dutch Deepgram 2025b. Arabic and Persian are absent from this language list, which is why Nova-3 results are suppressed for all Arabic and Persian pairs in our benchmark. This architectural distinction is consequential for code-switching evaluation: language-agnostic and LLM-integrated decoders can in principle produce mixed-script output within a single sentence, whereas segment-level LID systems are structurally limited to producing one script per recognition segment. The WER and BERTScore results reported in Section 5 reflect this constraint directly. Deepgram Nova-3 does not list Arabic or Persian in its documented CS language support. For these pairs we suppress WER and BERTScore and exclude the system from aggregate rankings — evaluating a system outside its design envelope produces numbers that reflect the absence of capability, not a fair comparison. 

4.2. Text Normalisation 

Before computing any metric, both reference and hypothesis are normalised: lowercased, punctuation removed, whitespace collapsed. Arabic and Persian script characters are preserved throughout —a model transcribing Arabic-script speech in Latin characters is penalised, not rewarded. We note that production Arabic and Persian ASR pipelines typically apply additional canonicalisation steps beyond what we use here: unification of hamza variants ( ﺃ/ﺇ/ﺍ), collapsing ta marbuta to ta (ﺓ → ﻩ), diacritic stripping, and conversion between Arabic-Indic ( ٠١٢ ) and Western (012) digit forms. We deliberately omit these here to evaluate the raw output of each provider’s decoder without masking systematic preprocessing differences between systems. A consequence is that orthographic variants that a production system would treat as identical are penalised by WER in our setup. BERTScore is partially robust to these variants because the multilingual encoder maps them to nearby points in embedding space; this is an additional reason to report both metrics rather than either alone. 

4.3. Word Error Rate 

WER is defined as: WER = S + D + IN (8) where S, D, I are substituted, deleted, and inserted words in the minimum-edit-distance alignment between reference (length N ) and hypothesis, found via dynamic programming (the jiwer library). WER can exceed 1.0 when insertions are numerous.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 8May 2026

Crucially, WER has no concept of semantic equivalence: the substitution feature → ڣچ۫ݠ (Persian translit-eration of “feature”) incurs the same unit penalty as substituting a completely wrong word. 

4.4. BERTScore 

BERTScore Zhang et al. 2019 computes soft token alignment in the embedding space of a pretrained transformer. Let R = {r1, . . . , r m} and H = {h1, . . . , h n} be the reference and hypothesis token sets with contextual embeddings ri, hj ∈ Rd. Precision and recall: 

PBERT = 1

|H|

∑ 

> hj∈H

max  

> ri∈R

cos( hj , ri) (9) 

RBERT = 1

|R|

∑

> ri∈R

max   

> hj∈H

cos( ri, hj ) (10) F1 is the harmonic mean: 

FBERT = 2 · PBERT · RBERT 

PBERT + RBERT 

(11) We use bert-base-multilingual-cased (mBERT; Devlin et al. (2019)), pre-trained on 104 languages. The critical property for CS evaluation is that mBERT maps tokens from all languages into a shared latent space, so semantically equivalent tokens in different scripts — e.g. , feature and ڣچ۫ݠ — are geometrically proximate. A transcription semantically correct but using a different script convention receives a high FBERT ,whereas it receives a full substitution penalty under WER. We use lang="others" (multilingual mode, no baseline rescaling) and batch size 32. 

# 5. Results 

5.1. Overall Rankings 

Table 4 reports the overall mean WER and BERTScore for each system. Figures 2 and 3 show the full breakdown across all four language pairs in a single view. ElevenLabs Scribe v2 leads on both metrics across all four language pairs.  

> Table 4: Overall results across CS-supported language pairs. Deepgram evaluated on German only.

System Mean WER Mean BERTScore CS Pairs 

ElevenLabs Scribe v2 13.2% 0.936 4OpenAI gpt-4o-transcribe 38.6% 0.856 4Google Chirp 3 39.4% 0.862 4Azure AI Speech (CLID) 43.6% 0.839 4Deepgram Nova-3 5.0% † 0.959 † 1 

> †

German only; not directly comparable. 

Note on Deepgram. Deepgram Nova-3 achieves 5.0% WER and 0.959 BERTScore, but these figures are from the German–English pair only. Its “overall” number reflects one of the easiest language pairs in our benchmark and is not comparable to systems evaluated across all four pairs. 

5.2. Performance Across Language Pairs 

Figures 2 and 3 report the per-language-pair results, making separate result tables unnecessary. Across Egyptian Arabic–English, Saudi Arabic–English, Persian–English, and German–English, ElevenLabs Scribe     

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 9May 2026
> Figure 2: Mean WER (%) for all five systems across all four language pairs. Each group of bars represents one language pair; bars within a group are colour-coded by system. Deepgram results shown for German only (no Arabic/Persian CS support). Lower is better.

v2 is the most consistent system: it achieves the lowest WER for all four language pairs and remains competitive or leading on BERTScore. The Arabic pairs are substantially harder than German–English. Egyptian Arabic–English includes dense intra-sentential switching, as in: 

screens ﺍܳـ ඔ൹ً confuseـਃಸ user ﺍܳـ ،redesign ﺝ؇ٺො ੼ ﺩﻩ UX flow ނ؇لژ ﺇﻥ ﺍܳـ ؇َﺃ 

(“I think this UX flow needs a redesign, the user gets confused between the screens”) 

Saudi Arabic–English introduces additional dialectal variation through Najdi and Hijazi speech. Google Chirp 3 performs worse on Saudi Arabic than on Egyptian Arabic, suggesting that Gulf dialectal phonology remains less robustly covered than more widely represented Arabic varieties. ElevenLabs retains a clear advantage on both Arabic pairs, indicating that its gains are not limited to a single dialect. Persian–English shows the strongest mismatch between WER and semantic adequacy. Farsi uses right-to-left Perso-Arabic script, while English words may remain in Latin script or be transliterated. For example, a reference containing feature, bug, and deadline may be transcribed with semantically equivalent Persian forms such as ڣچ۫ݠ and ً؇گ . WER treats these as string substitutions, whereas BERTScore gives partial credit for their semantic equivalence. This explains why Persian results in Figure 3 are less severe than the corresponding WER gaps in Figure 2. German–English is the easiest pair because both languages use the Latin script, reducing transliteration ambiguity. The leading systems cluster closely on this pair, and WER and BERTScore are much more concordant than for Arabic or Persian. Deepgram Nova-3 is therefore reported only for German–English and should not be interpreted as an overall competitor to systems evaluated across all four pairs. Taken together, the language-pair results show that aggregate scores hide important structure: Arabic performance is shaped by dialectal coverage, Persian performance is shaped by script and transliteration choices, and German performance reflects a lower-ambiguity code-switching setting.   

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 10 May 2026
> Figure 3: Mean BERTScore F1 for all five systems across all four language pairs ( bert-base-multilingual-cased ). BERTScore rewards semantically correct transliteration that WER would penalise. Higher is better.

Appendix D provides the full qualitative side-by-side transcription comparison for the highest-divergence examples across all language pairs, including Table 10. 

# 6. Analysis 

6.1. Difficulty-Stratified Performance 

A well-calibrated benchmark should show rising error rates as difficulty increases. We stratify all CS-supported samples into quartiles by H_Score and compute mean WER per quartile (Table 5).  

> Table 5: Mean WER by H_Score difficulty quartile (CS-supported samples; Deepgram excluded).

Quartile ElevenLabs Google OpenAI Azure 

Q1 (easiest) 2.0% 4.4% 9.7% 17.1% Q2 13.9% 30.8% 46.2% 46.4% Q3 15.0% 54.4% 48.7% 54.2% Q4 (hardest) 20.0% 61.5% 45.2% 52.2% Benchmark calibration holds: WER increases Q1 →Q4 for all systems. The gap between ElevenLabs and Google Chirp 3 is 2.4 percentage points at Q1 but 41.5 points at Q4. Systems that appear broadly comparable on aggregate WER diverge dramatically when evaluated on the hardest code-switching instances. 

6.2. BERTScore Across Difficulty Quartiles 

Table 6 reveals a counterintuitive finding: ElevenLabs’ BERTScore increases from Q3 (0.929) to Q4 (0.938) — the hardest quartile receives the highest non-Q1 score of any system. Q4 is dominated by Arabic and Persian utterances with heavy morphological blending and dense switch-  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 11 May 2026
> Table 6: Mean BERTScore F1 by H_Score difficulty quartile.

Quartile ElevenLabs Google OpenAI Azure 

Q1 (easiest) 0.961 0.962 0.949 0.896 Q2 0.920 0.889 0.826 0.839 Q3 0.929 0.819 0.826 0.812 Q4 (hardest) 0.938 0.797 0.837 0.817 ing. We hypothesise that ElevenLabs consistently picks a single script convention and applies it coherently, whereas other models produce inconsistent outputs. WER penalises any deviation from the reference’s script convention; BERTScore rewards semantic fidelity regardless of script. ElevenLabs’ Q4 BERTScore advan-tage therefore suggests it is capturing semantic content correctly even when WER would count its output as wrong. 

6.3. WER–BERTScore Divergence by Language Pair 

We quantify the agreement between WER and BERTScore rankings using Kendall’s τ , computed across all CS-supported systems for each language pair. For n systems there are (n

> 2

) possible system pairs. A pair 

(i, j ) is concordant (C) if both metrics agree on which system is better, and discordant (D) if they disagree. Kendall’s τ is then: 

τ = C − D

(n

> 2

) (12) 

τ = 1 indicates perfect agreement between the two metric rankings; τ = 0 indicates no correlation.     

> Table 7: WER–BERTScore rank concordance (Kendall’s τ) per language pair, computed from the benchmark results.
> n= number of CS-supported systems evaluated.

Language Pair n Pairs Kendall’s τ

Egyptian Arabic–English 4 6 1.000 Saudi Arabic–English 4 6 1.000 Persian–English 4 6 1.000 German–English 5 10 0.800 Table 7 reveals that WER and BERTScore produce identical system rankings for all three Arabic and Persian pairs ( τ = 1 .0, all six system pairs concordant): both metrics place ElevenLabs Scribe v2 first and Google Chirp 3 last on Egyptian and Saudi Arabic, and both place ElevenLabs first and OpenAI last on Persian. The transliteration variance problem does not cause metric disagreement at the ordinal ranking 

level. The divergence is instead in the absolute score magnitudes . WER reports a 46.6 percentage point spread between ElevenLabs (13.1%) and Google Chirp 3 (59.7%) on Egyptian Arabic; BERTScore reports a spread of only 0.135 (0.939 vs 0.804). WER inflates the apparent quality gap because it penalises transliteration choices as errors, even when the hypothesis is semantically correct. A system that transcribes feature ﺍܳـ as 

the feature incurs WER substitution penalties; BERTScore maps both to the same neighbourhood in the multilingual embedding space and scores them as equivalent. The practical implication is clear: for Arabic and Persian ASR evaluation, WER correctly identifies the ranking of systems but overstates the performance differences between them. BERTScore should be reported alongside WER to give an accurate picture of the magnitude of quality gaps. German–English is the only pair where the two metrics produce a discordant ranking ( τ = 0 .800 , nine of ten system pairs concordant, one discordant). ElevenLabs Scribe v2 achieves lower WER than Google Chirp 3 (1.8% vs 4.1%) but slightly lower BERTScore (0.961 vs 0.964). The inversion reflects a regime difference at near-zero error rates: at this level of accuracy, BERTScore detects subtle semantic differences  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 12 May 2026

that WER, operating on near-perfect word sequences, cannot resolve. This is consistent with the absence of transliteration ambiguity in German–English — both metrics are measuring genuine transcription quality, and they converge to within 0.003 BERTScore points while disagreeing by 2.3 WER percentage points. 

6.4. BERT Embedding Space Analysis 

To provide direct visual evidence that semantically equivalent code-switching utterances are geometrically proximate in the multilingual embedding space — regardless of script convention — we project a sample of Persian reference and ElevenLabs hypothesis sentence embeddings into two dimensions. We encode 80 randomly sampled Persian–English utterance pairs using Reimers and Gurevych 2019, a mul-tilingual sentence encoder trained to place semantically equivalent sentences close together across languages, and reduce to 2D using UMAP McInnes, Healy, and Melville 2018. Figure 4 shows the result.      

> Figure 4: UMAP projection of multilingual sentence embeddings for 80 Persian–English utterance pairs. Blue = reference transcripts; orange = ElevenLabs Scribe v2 hypotheses. Each grey line connects a reference–hypothesis pair. The tight clustering of connected pairs — short line lengths — confirms semantic proximity despite surface-level script differences ( e.g. ,feature vs.

ڣچ۫ݠ ), consistent with the high Persian–English BERTScore values reported in Section 5. Pairs with longer connecting lines correspond to samples where the model hallucinated or omitted content. 

Figure 4 reveals several properties of the multilingual embedding space that directly support our argument. First, reference (blue) and hypothesis (orange) points are spatially interleaved throughout the 2D projection with no visible separation between the two clouds, confirming that the encoder does not represent script convention as a distinguishing dimension. Second, the majority of connecting lines are short relative to the typical inter-point distance in the cloud, indicating that most reference–hypothesis pairs are geometrically closer to each other than to other utterances — the visual correlate of high BERTScore. Third, the loose clusters visible in the projection reflect topical and structural similarity rather than language identity: ref-erence and hypothesis points from the same semantic domain co-locate regardless of script convention. Asmall number of pairs with visibly long connecting lines ( ∼10–15% of the sample) correspond to genuinely erroneous transcriptions where content was hallucinated or omitted; these are the cases where both WER and BERTScore correctly agree that the transcription is wrong. Crucially, there is no systematic directional offset between blue and orange points, ruling out any encoding bias toward one script convention. The encoder treats feature and ڣچ۫ݠ as the same point in meaning-space — which is precisely why BERTScore rewards a transcription that WER penalises.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 13 May 2026

# 7. Discussion 

7.1. On the Choice of Evaluation Metric 

Our results provide concrete evidence that WER, while reliable for ranking ASR systems on Arabic and Persian code-switching, systematically overstates the magnitude of performance differences. The Kendall’s 

τ analysis (Section 6.3) shows perfect rank concordance between WER and BERTScore for all Arabic and Persian pairs ( τ = 1 .0): both metrics agree on which system is best and worst. However, WER reports a 46.6 percentage point spread on Egyptian Arabic where BERTScore reports only 0.135 — a 3.4 × inflation of the apparent quality gap. The Persian example in Section 4.4 illustrates the mechanism: 30.8% WER for a semantically correct transcription whose only “errors” are consistent transliteration choices. The embedding analysis in Section 6.4 confirms this at scale. We recommend: (1) always report both WER and BERTScore for Arabic and Persian CS pairs; (2) treat BERTScore as the primary metric for measuring the size of quality gaps between systems, since it is not inflated by transliteration variance; (3) if script consistency is a hard requirement ( e.g. , for downstream NLP pipelines expecting a specific encoding), supplement BERTScore with a script-normalised WER that maps all script variants to a canonical form before comparison. 

7.2. Difficulty Stratification and Benchmark Design 

The large performance spread across difficulty quartiles (Table 5) highlights a general limitation of aggre-gate ASR benchmarks: mean WER over a diverse corpus can obscure failure modes that only manifest at high switching density or morphological complexity. Our two-stage selection pipeline deliberately over-represents these hard cases. The rising Q1 →Q4 WER gradient validates the H_Score as a meaningful proxy for ASR difficulty despite being computed entirely from surface-level statistics with no semantic knowledge. 

7.3. Dialect Stratification within Arabic 

The two Arabic–English language pairs in our benchmark (Egyptian Arabic–English and Saudi Arabic– English) are reported as separate aggregates, but the Saudi dataset itself spans at least two distinct dialectal varieties — Najdi and Hijazi — which differ phonetically and lexically. Aggregating across them yields a single WER number that can mask substantial per-dialect failure modes. This is not a hypothetical concern: in production Arabic ASR deployments, a model that achieves acceptable mean WER across a mixed-dialect corpus can still fail consistently on one specific dialect, producing systematically worse experience for the segment of customers who speak it. The aggregate number passes; the customer experience does not. We therefore recommend that future ASR benchmarks targeting multi-dialect languages report dialect-stratified WER and BERTScore as a first-class result, on the same footing as language-pair aggregates. The same argument extends to Persian (regional varieties beyond Tehran-variety Farsi) and to any language with substantial internal dialectal variation. A practical consequence for benchmark construction is that dialect coverage should be treated as a separate sampling axis from language pair coverage: balancing language pairs without balancing dialects within them can still produce a benchmark that systematically underrepresents particular speaker populations. Where per-sample dialect labels are unavailable in the source corpus — as is partially the case for our Saudi dataset — this analysis cannot be performed retroactively, and we flag this as a corpus-design recommendation rather than a result we are able to report here in full. 

7.4. Deployment Considerations 

The benchmark results reported in this paper measure offline transcription quality on pre-recorded audio. Practitioners selecting an ASR provider for production deployment face a second axis of considerations that aggregate WER and BERTScore do not capture, and which materially affect provider selection.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 14 May 2026

Latency. LLM-integrated decoders such as gpt-4o-transcribe and large end-to-end models such as Scribe v2 typically exhibit higher per-request latency than streaming-optimised systems. For batch transcription workloads (call recordings, archival audio, research corpora) this is irrelevant. For real-time use cases (live captioning, conversational agents, contact-centre assistance) the highest-accuracy model on this benchmark may not be the right choice; a system with marginally higher WER but sub-second streaming latency can deliver a better end-user experience. 

Cost at production volume. Per-minute pricing varies by approximately an order of magnitude across the providers evaluated. For an enterprise transcribing tens of thousands of hours per month, this dominates the total cost of ownership and can reverse the apparent ranking from accuracy alone. We deliberately do not report current pricing in this paper because provider pricing changes faster than the publication cycle, but practitioners should compute the cost-adjusted ranking for their specific volume profile rather than selecting on WER alone. 

Segment-level LID failure modes in real traffic. The architectural limitation discussed in Section 4 — that segment-level LID systems cannot switch languages within a recognition segment — has a concrete operational consequence in customer support traffic, where a single utterance frequently contains a matrix-language sentence with one or two embedded English technical terms. In our experience deploying Arabic ASR to Gulf enterprise customers, this is the modal utterance shape in banking, healthcare, and telco support calls, not the exception. A system that cannot represent within-utterance switching will systematically misrecognise this shape regardless of how well it performs on the monolingual segments either side of the switch. 

Evaluation harness design. We emphasise that the choice of evaluation methodology matters as much as the choice of model. A benchmark that reports a single aggregate WER number across all dialects and all switching densities will rank models very differently from one that stratifies by difficulty (Table 5) and by dialect (Section 7.3). Practitioners selecting a provider for a specific deployment should build their own evaluation harness against samples representative of their actual traffic, rather than relying on any single published WER figure — including ours. 

7.5. Future Work Broader speaker demographics. Future benchmark releases should expand coverage beyond the current Saudi Najdi and Hijazi varieties to include additional Gulf dialects. Similarly, the Persian dataset should be extended beyond informal Tehran-variety speech to include a wider range of regional Farsi varieties and speaker backgrounds. 

Wider domain coverage. Future work should evaluate code-switching ASR outside the technology and professional contexts emphasized here. Domains such as healthcare, education, public services, and casual conversation may exhibit different code-switching patterns, lower English loanword density, and different error profiles. 

Reference transcript normalization. A useful extension would be to develop multi-reference or normalization-aware evaluation protocols that explicitly account for transliteration variability in human annotations. Such protocols would better distinguish genuine recognition errors from acceptable script or spelling alternatives. 

Longitudinal commercial evaluation. Because commercial ASR systems change over time, future bench-mark runs should repeat this evaluation across model versions and release cycles. Longitudinal tracking would make it possible to measure whether provider updates improve code-switching robustness or simply shift er-rors across language pairs and domains.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 15 May 2026

# 8. Conclusion 

We have presented a benchmark for evaluating commercial ASR systems on code-switching speech, covering four language pairs spanning three scripts and two linguistic families. Our two-stage selection pipeline selects structurally and semantically difficult samples while reducing LLM scoring costs by ≈ 91% .ElevenLabs Scribe v2 is the strongest performer across all four language pairs by both WER and BERTScore, with the gap largest on Arabic pairs (3.5 × advantage on Egyptian Arabic WER of 13.1% vs. 45.9% for the next competitor) and smallest on German, where all but one system achieves under 10% WER. Azure AI Speech achieved a mean WER of 43.6% across all four language pairs after explicitly enabling SpeechService Connection_LanguageIdMode=Continuous in the SDK configuration — an improvement of 2.0 percentage points over the default AtStart LID mode, with the largest gain on German–English (17.1% vs. 20.5%). We demonstrate that WER systematically underestimates the quality of Arabic and Persian transcriptions due to script convention variance, and that BERTScore with a multilingual encoder provides a more reliable quality signal. Crucially, while WER and BERTScore agree on the ordinal ranking of systems for all Arabic and Persian pairs ( τ = 1 .0), WER inflates the magnitude of quality gaps by a factor of approximately 3 ×

compared to BERTScore — a distinction that matters significantly when selecting between providers whose absolute performance differences are smaller than WER suggests. 

# References 

Auer, Peter, ed. (2013). Code-Switching in Conversation: Language, Interaction and Identity . London: Rout-ledge. Baevski, Alexei et al. (2020). “wav2vec 2.0: A Framework for Self-Supervised Learning of Speech Represen-tations”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 33, pp. 12449–12460. Deepgram (2025a). Introducing Nova-3: Setting a New Standard for AI-Driven Speech-to-Text . Deepgram Blog. Accessed: May 2026. url : https://deepgram.com/learn/introducing-nova-3-speech-to-text-api .— (2025b). Nova-3 Multilingual Goes GA: Real-Time Code-Switching Across 10 Languages . Deepgram Devel-oper Changelog. Accessed: May 2026. url : https://developers.deepgram.com/changelog/2025/3/31 .Deuchar, Margaret et al. (2014). Building Bilingual Corpora . Miami Bangor Corpus. Devlin, Jacob et al. (2019). “BERT: Pre-Training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Under-standing”. In: Proceedings of NAACL-HLT , pp. 4171–4186. Diwan, Anuj et al. (2021). “Multilingual and Code-Switching ASR Challenges for Low Resource Indian Languages”. In: Proceedings of Interspeech , pp. 2446–2450. ElevenLabs (2025). Models: Scribe v2 . ElevenLabs Documentation. Accessed: May 2026. url : https : / / elevenlabs.io/docs/overview/models#scribe-v2 .Google Cloud (2025). Chirp 3 Transcription: Enhanced Multilingual Accuracy . Google Cloud Speech-to-Text Documentation. Accessed: May 2026. url : https://docs.cloud.google.com/speech-to-text/docs/ models/chirp-3 .Gumperz, John J. (1982). Discourse Strategies . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hamed, Injy, Mohamed Elmahdy, and Slim Abdennadher (2017). “Collection and Annotation of Egyptian Arabic-English Code-Switched Data”. In: Proceedings of the Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop ,pp. 124–130. Hamed, Injy, Ngoc Thang Vu, and Slim Abdennadher (May 2020). “ArzEn: A Speech Corpus for Code-switched Egyptian Arabic-English”. eng. In: Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference . Ed. by Nicoletta Calzolari et al. Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association, pp. 4237–4246. isbn : 979-10-95546-34-4. url : https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.523/ .Levenshtein, Vladimir I. (1966). “Binary Codes Capable of Correcting Deletions, Insertions, and Reversals”. In: Soviet Physics Doklady 10.8, pp. 707–710. Lyu, Dau-Cheng et al. (2010). “SEAME: A Mandarin-English Code-Switching Speech Corpus in South-East Asia”. In: Proceedings of Interspeech , pp. 1986–1989. Makhoul, John et al. (1999). “Performance Measures for Information Extraction”. In: Proceedings of DARPA Broadcast News Workshop , pp. 249–252.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 16 May 2026

McInnes, Leland, John Healy, and James Melville (2018). “UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension Reduction”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426 .Microsoft Corporation (2024). Implement language identification — Azure AI Speech . Microsoft Azure Doc-umentation. Accessed: May 2026. url : https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/ speech-service/language-identification .Myers-Scotton, Carol (1997). Duelling Languages: Grammatical Structure in Codeswitching . Oxford: Oxford University Press. OpenAI (2025). Introducing Next-Generation Audio Models in the API . OpenAI Blog. Accessed: May 2026. 

url : https://openai.com/index/introducing-our-next-generation-audio-models/ .Poplack, Shana (1980). “Sometimes I’ll Start a Sentence in Spanish Y TERMINO EN ESPAÑOL: Toward a Typology of Code-Switching”. In: Linguistics 18.7–8, pp. 581–618. Radford, Alec et al. (2023). “Robust Speech Recognition via Large-Scale Weak Supervision”. In: Proceedings of ICML .Reimers, Nils and Iryna Gurevych (2019). “Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks”. In: Proceedings of EMNLP-IJCNLP , pp. 3982–3992. Shia, Chi-Jiun et al. (2004). “Language boundary detection and identification of mixed-language speech based on map estimation”. In: 2004 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing .Vol. 1. IEEE, pp. I–381. Toshniwal, Shubham et al. (2018). “Multilingual Speech Recognition with a Single End-to-End Model”. In: 

Proceedings of ICASSP , pp. 4904–4908. Watanabe, Shinji et al. (2017). “Hybrid CTC/Attention Architecture for End-to-End Speech Recognition”. In: Proceedings of Interspeech , pp. 3408–3412. Xie, Peng et al. (2026). “SwitchLingua: The First Large-Scale Multilingual and Multi-Ethnic Code-Switching Dataset”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38. Zhang, Tianyi et al. (2019). “Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675 .

# A. ASR Systems and API Parameters 

Tables 8 and 9 document the systems evaluated and the exact API parameters used for the benchmark. 

# B. H_Score Formula and Signal Weights 

Full H_Score composite (Equation 7): 

H = 0 .30 hmix + 0 .30 halt + 0 .20 hmorph + 0 .10 hlen + 0 .10 hvocab 

hmix = min 

( min( na,n l)/(na+nl)0.35 , 1

)

× 10 

halt = min 

( kn/ 2 , 1

)

× 10 

hmorph = min ( b 

> 3

, 1) × 10 

hlen =

{

0 n < 5min ( n−520 , 1) × 10 n ≥ 5

hvocab = min 

( |vocab |/n  

> 0.7

, 1

)

× 10 

# C. LLM Scoring Prompt Structure 

Each LLM receives the transcript text and language pair label and returns a JSON response with the following schema (temperature 0.1):                     

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 17 May 2026
> {" overall_score ": <int 1-10>, " dimensions ": {" morphological_blending ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} , " switching_density ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} , " slang_and_register_mix ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} , " phonological_ambiguity ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} , " named_entity_jargon_density ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} , " script_orthographic_complexity ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} }, " hard_tokens ": [{" token ":"..." , " reason ":"..."} , ...] , " summary ": "..." }

The Ensemble_Score is the average of both overall_score values. Rows where the two models disagree by > 3 points on any dimension are flagged for manual review. 

# D. Qualitative Transcription Comparison 

Table 10 presents a comprehensive side-by-side comparison across all four language pairs and all CS-supported models . For each language pair, the 5 samples with the highest WER–BERTScore divergence are selected — these are the cases where WER most severely over-penalises a semantically correct transcription due to transliteration variance. The ∆ column is the key signal, defined as: 

∆ = WER − (1 − FBERT ) (13) where 1 − FBERT is the semantic error rate implied by BERTScore — converting it to the same scale as WER (lower = better). Interpreting ∆:• ∆ > 0: WER penalises the transcription more than its semantic distance from the reference justifies. This is the signature of transliteration variance — the model produced the correct meaning in a different script convention. • ∆ ≈ 0: both metrics agree; the transcription error is genuine, not a script-convention artefact. • ∆ < 0: BERTScore detects more semantic distance than WER counts as word errors (rare). Rows with ∆ > 0.10 are shown in bold . Deepgram is included for German only (no Arabic/Persian CS support).   

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 18 May 2026
> Table 8: ASR systems evaluated, their underlying architecture, and code-switching (CS) language pair support.

Provider Model CS Mechanism CS Pairs 

ElevenLabs Scribe v2 End-to-end multilingual encoder; automatic lan-guage detection without explicit language input; native intra-utterance code-switching across 99 languages All 4 OpenAI gpt-4o-transcribe GPT-4o decoder directly integrated into the audio pipeline; encoder and language model share weights, enabling contex-tual disambiguation of mixed-language tokens All 4 Google Chirp 3 Universal Speech Model (USM) trained on 12M hours across 300+ languages; language-agnostic transcription via 

language_codes=["auto"] 

in the Speech-to-Text v2 API All 4 Microsoft Azure Speech (CLID) Continuous Language Identification mode (LanguageIdMode=Continuous ); segments audio at utter-ance level and re-identifies language per segment; up to 10 candidate languages supplied to 

AutoDetectSourceLanguageConfig 

All 4 Deepgram Nova-3 Unified multilin-gual decoder with 

language=multi ; trained on synthetic code-switched data across 10 languages including English, Span-ish, French, German, Hindi, Russian, Portuguese, Japanese, Italian, and Dutch; Arabic and Persian not in the documented CS language list German only  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 19

May 2026 

Table 9: API parameters used for each system in this benchmark. Parameters not listed were left at provider defaults. All audio was resampled to 16 kHz mono WAV before submission to Azure (SDK requirement); other providers received the original MP3 files. 

Provider Endpoint / SDK Key parameters 

ElevenLabs POST /v1/speech-to-text model_id=scribe_v2 ; no language_code supplied (automatic detection); 

diarize=false ; no_verbatim=false 

OpenAI POST /v1/audio/ /transcriptions model=gpt-4o-transcribe ; no language supplied (automatic detection); 

response_format=text ; temperature=0 

Google Speech-to-Text v2 

Recognize model=chirp_3 ; language_codes=["auto"] (language-agnostic mode); 

auto_decoding_config={} ; region endpoint us-speech.googleapis.com 

Microsoft Azure Speech SDK v1.x (Python) 

SpeechServiceConnection_LanguageIdMode=Continuous (explicitly set via 

set_property() ; default is AtStart ); AutoDetectSource-LanguageConfig with 4 candidate locales per dataset ( e.g. , ar-EG, en-US for Egyptian Arabic); continuous recognition; workers forced to 1 to avoid macOS SDK audio concurrency issue Microsoft Corporation 2024 Deepgram POST /v1/listen model=nova-3 ; language=multi (multilingual code-switching mode); 

smart_format=true ; punctuate=true 

Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 20 May 2026  

> Table 10:  Comprehensive qualitative comparison across all four language pairs and CS-supported models. Rows are selected to maximise WER–BERTScore divergence ( ∆ =  WER  − (1  − FBERT )):  a positive  ∆ means WER penalises the transcription more than its semantic error rate justifies — the signature of transliteration variance. Bold =  ∆ > 0.10 . Deepgram shown for German only.
> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> Egyptian Arabic–English  (5 samples with highest WER–BERTScore divergence)
> ފࡤࡲ྘ﺍܳފ ሒᇭ ೞಱਵؗ bug ሒᇭ ﺯﻡ৖৑ ،users ـይዧ logout أ݄ܭਃಸ َأ݄ሒᇭ fix ᄩᄥ ﺃ๤ངﻉ ﻭڢب.
> ElevenLabs  system ﺍܳـ ሒᇭ ೞಱਵؗ bug ሒᇭ .users ـይዧ log out أ݄ܭਃಸ ﻉ๤ངﺃ ሒᇭ fix ᄩᄟ ﺯﻡ َأ݄ܭ৖৑ ﻭڢب
> 46.7%  0.879  +0.346
> OpenAI  ሒᇭ ً܁ ሒᇭ ೞಱਵؗ ﺍܳފ྘ފࡤࡲ ਃಸأ݄ܭ ܳިﺝ ﺍﻭﺕ ይዧ٭ިﺯﺭﺯ. ৖৑ﺯﻡ َأ݄ᄩᄥ ڣ٭ܝݴ ሒᇭ ﺃ๤ངﻉ ﻭڢب.
> 33.3%  0.832  +0.165
> Google  ފࡤࡲ྘ﺍܳފ ሒᇭ ೞಱਵؗ bug ሒᇭ ਃಸأ݄ܭ ይዧ log out٭ިﺯﺭﺯ، ৖৑ﺯﻡ َأ݄ܭ ሒᇭ fix ᄩᄟ ﺃ๤ངﻉ ﻭڢب.
> 33.3%  0.927  +0.260
> Azure  ሒᇭ ً؇ﺝ ሒᇭ ೞಱਵؗ ﺍܳފ྘ފࡤࡲ ਃಸأ݄ܭ ܳިﺝ ﺃﻭﺕ ይዧ٭ިﺯﺭ؟ ৖৑ﺯﻡ َأ݄ሒᇭ ᄩᄥ ﺃ๤ངﻉ ﻭڢب؟
> 40.0%  0.785  +0.185
> internet connection ﺍܳـ ًﺍܳዛዊ؇ﺭﺩﺓ، ༡؇ﻭܳب  ﻭۋݷ ༥ڎﺍ troubleshooting ܭᆇᅦﺃ ይዧݠﺍﻭߙߵ ྵื݁ڰ྘ݷ ڣ؇ࣖࢴﺓ.
> ElevenLabs  internet connection ﺍܳـ ﻭۋݷ ༥ڎﺍ ﺍܳዛዊ؇ﺭﺩﺓ. ༡؇ﻭܳب ـይዧ troubleshooting ܭᆇᅦﺃ ﺓࣖࢴ؇ڣ ݷ྘ڣ ؇݁ྵื router
> 46.2%  0.884  +0.345
> OpenAI  ﺍ೑಻ଫଐَ৕৑ ܋ިَܝލ ݆ﻭۋݷ ༥ڎﺍ ﺍܳዛዊ؇ﺭﺩﺓ. ༡؇ﻭܳب ﺃᆇᅦܭ ߙߵًܭ ނި྘ོٷھ ይዧݠﺍﻭߙߵ ྵื݁ڰ྘ݷ ڣ؇ࣖࢴﺓ.
> 53.8%  0.875  +0.414
> Google  ﺍ೑಻ଫଐَ৖৑ ܋ިَܝލ ݆ﻭۋݷ ༥ڎﺍ ﺍܳዛዊ؇ﺭﺩﻩ ༡؇ﻭܳب ﺍᆇᅦܭ ߙߵﺍًܭ ނި਍ಾھይዧ ݠﺍﻭߙߵ ྵื݁؇ ڣ྘ݷ ڣ؇ࣖࢱﻩ
> 84.6%  0.773  +0.619
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

21 May 2026 Table 10 – continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> Azure  ﺍ೑಻ଫଐَ৕৑ ܋ިَܝލ ݆ﻭۋݷ ༥ڎ ﺍ ﺍܳዛዊ؇ﺭﺩﻩ؟ ༡؇ﻭܳب ﺃᆇᅦܭ ߙߵﺍًܭ ނި਍ಾھይዧ ݠﺍﻭߙߵ ྵื݁؇ ڣ྘ݷ ڣ؇ࣖࢴﺓ.
> 76.9%  0.826  +0.595
> ؇۳أ݄ܹ਍ಸ ঌፇዧﺍ new feature ݁ؕﺍܳـ integration ﺩﻱ ۱ٺۜٺ؇ﺝ .ሒᇚ؇ﺭ༠ API
> ElevenLabs  มฃ۱ لڰ٭ڎ ނ ިﺍ਍ಸ ঌፇዧأ݄ܹ۳؇؟ ﺇﺫﺍ APIؕ݁ integration ﻙࣖࢻ ሒᇚﺭ؇༠
> 54.5%  0.775  +0.321
> OpenAI ݆ ﺍਐಸ ঌፇዧأ݄ܹ۳؇ ﺩﻩ ොູٺ؇ﺝ ﺍ౯౜రݠ૰૏ ሒᇚ؇ﺭ༠ APIؕ݁
> 63.6%  0.822  +0.459
> Google  new feature  81.8%  0.733  +0.551
> Azure  ﺃﻥ لڰ٭ڎ ނ؞ܭ ﺍદઑ ݁ٷ؇ﺯﻝ، my ،integration ،۹ٺොູ .ሒᇚﺭ؇༠
> 90.9%  0.704  +0.613
> ৖৑ﺯﻡ َأ݄ܭ ይዧ commitـܝިﺩ ﺩﻩ আॻ༟ ﺍܳـ main branch ڢٴܭ ﺍܳـ .ﺓ୍ଲً ﻉ؇ਐಸ deadline
> ElevenLabs  code ܳـ commit ﺯﻡ َأ݄ܭ৖৑ ڢٴܭ Main branch আॻ༟ ﺩﻩ .ܝިﺍ༟؇ਐಸ deadline
> 42.9%  0.880  +0.308
> OpenAI  ৖৑ﺯﻡ َأ݄ܭ ይዧ commitـܝިﺩ ﺩﻩ ﻉ؇ਐಸ દઊ৖৑ࣖࢴᄴᄟڢٴܭ ﺍྸฺ ߓߵﺍ ඔ൹గጻዧ .ﻩ୍ଲً
> 50.0%  0.847  +0.347
> Google  ৖৑ﺯﻡ َأ݄ܭ ܋ި݁٭ب ይዧـܝިﺩ ﺩﻩ ﻉ؇ਐಸ દઊ৖৑ࣖ ࢴᄴᄟڢٴܭ ﺍྸฺ ߓߵﺍ ඔ൹గጻዧ .ﻩ୍ଲً
> 57.1%  0.792  +0.363
> Azure  ,Comet ,Azam Neville main ,Dallas ,Liquid branch of the deadline .with ABUK
> 78.6%  0.678  +0.464
> ﺃَ؇ ༡؇ݿݴ ﺇﻥ ﺍܳـ account ﻭ݁ݷ hacked ᄩᄥﺍّأ݄ ሒᇼ؇ਐಸ .log in ܭᆇᅦﺭﻑ ﺃ؇༟
> ElevenLabs  ﺃَ؇ ༡؇ݿݴ ﺇﻥ ﺍ৙৑܋ިሒᇼ؇ਐಸ ೑಻ ﺍّأ݄ܭ hack ᄩᄟ ﻭ݁ݷ ༟؇ﺭﻑ .log in ܭᆇᅦﺃ
> 38.5%  0.922  +0.307
> OpenAI  ሒᇼ؇ਐಸ ೑಻ﻭႤ၍৙৑؇ݿݴ ﺇﻥ ﺍ༡ ؇َﺃ ﺍّأ݄۱ ᄩᄥ؇ᄕც ﻭ݁ݷ ༟؇ﺭﻑ ﺃᆇᅦܭ ܳިﺝ ﺇﻥ.
> 38.5%  0.827  +0.211
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 22

May 2026 Table 10 – continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> Google  ﺍَ؇ ༡؇ݿݴ ﺍﻥ ﺍ৖৑܋ިሒᇼ؇ਐಸ ೑಻ ﺍّأ݄ܭ ۱ ᄩᄟ؇༥ڎ ﻭ݁ݷ ༟؇ﺭﻑ ﺍᆇᅦܭ ܳިۏ݆.
> 76.9%  0.814  +0.583
> Azure  ೑಻ﻭႤ၍৙৑؇ݿݴ ﺃ َ۬ﺍ༡ ؇َﺃ ﻭ݁ݷ ᄕც؇۱ ᄩᄥﺃّأ݄ .ሒᇼ؇ਐಸ ༟؇ﺭﻑ ﺃᆇᅦܭ ܳިﺝ ﺇﻥ.
> 53.8%  0.801  +0.340 Saudi Arabic–English  (5 samples with highest WER–BERTScore divergence)
> ﺃ܋ਐಱ ๴ཇ ଫ଒أٴมฃ لިﻡ لݱbug ଫଃ ೞಱਵؗ، ﺃ༥ܹݴ ﺃݿިﻱ check commit ـይዧؕ ﻭﺃﺭۏ logs ـይዧ ﺍܳگڎቕሹ، ﻭᎂﺫﺍ ﺍොຶܹب ﺍৎ৊ލᄭႍၽ ሒᇿ؇༟ satisfaction ﺃۋݴ .achievement ۏٴب ሒᇃႧ၍
> ElevenLabs  bug ଫଃ݁؇ لݱ มฃأٴਐಱ ﺀ๴ཇ ଫ଒ﺃ܋ ೞಱਵؗ. ﺃ༥ܹݴ ﺃݿިﻱ check commitጋዧؕ ﻭﺃﺭۏ ogsጋዧ ﺍܳگڎቕሹ ﺇﺫﺍ ༡ܹب ﺍৎ৊ލ྘༡ ᄭႍၽݴ ݁؇ ૭૜ިﺍ܋ݷ ﺍܳأਊಾ ۹َႧ၍ ঌॻڎﺃ treatment
> 68.0%  0.838  +0.518
> OpenAI  ﺃ܋๴ཇ ଫ଒ﺀਐಱ أٴมฃ ݆݁ݬଫଃ ڣଫଐﺓ ೞಱਵؗ ﺃ༥ܹݴ ﺃݿިﻱ ّ؇ﻙ ܳߺࠊؗݴ ﻭﺃﺭۏ ይዧؕـܝި݁ٷٺ؇ﺕ ﺍܳگڎ۰ஓ୷ ﺇﺫﺍ ༡ܹ٭ب ﺍৎ৊ލᄭႍၽ ۋފ۰ .ٷبറഖ೺ ؇ّ ص྘ོ ﻥႧ၍ ঌॻ༟݆ ૰૜ݿިﺍ
> 80.0%  0.766  +0.566
> Google  ﺍ܋๴ཇ ଫ଒ﺀਐಱ أٴมฃ لިﻡ لݱଫଃ ًݑ ೞಱਵؗ ﺍ༥ܹݴ ﺍݿިﻱ ૰૜٭۹ ይዧߺࠊ܋ݴ ﻭﺍﺭۏ ይዧؕـܝި݁٭ب ﺍܳگڎஓ୷ ۬ﺍﺫﺍ ﺍොຶܹب ﺍৎ৊ލᄩႍၽ ﺍۋݴ ﺍܳފ؇྘ོފڰ؇܋ލ ݆༟؇ሒᇿ ሒᇃႤ၍ ۏٴب ﺍ྘૰૜٭ڰ݄ٷب.
> 76.0%  0.754  +0.514
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

23 May 2026 Table 10 – continued    

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> Azure  ﺃ܋๴ཇ ଫ଒ﺀਐಱ أٴมฃ، ﻭ لݱଫଃﻙ ೞಱਵؗ، ﺃ༥ܹݴ، ﺃݿިﻱ ૰૜٭۹ ይዧߺࠊ܋ݴ، ﻭﺃﺭۏ ይዧؕـܝި݁٭ڎﻱ ﺍܳگڎቕሹ ﺇ༡ ሌᇿ؇ᄭᄟ ﺍৎ৊ލᄭႍၽ، ﺃۋዝཏ؇ ﺩ૭૏ڰ؇܋ލ ݆ਊಾ ሒᇃႧ၍ ঌॻ༟ڎﺃ ૰૜٭ژ ݁٭ٷڎ.
> 84.0%  0.770  +0.610
> ﺇﺫﺍ ﺍܳٴߺࠊّިﺙ ݁؇ لܹگޔ ﺍܳފ݄؇۰༟ ݆݁ﺃݿިﻱ forget device ﻭﺃ٭ڎ ᄕც؊ّﻭﺃ ،pairing ᄭႍၽލৎ৊ݠﺕ ﺍಣಕᕬﺫﺍ ﺍᎂﻭ ،battery firmware update ﺏරජﺃ ލ؇ﻥ ߌߵۏ stableؕ.
> ElevenLabs  ﺇﺫﺍ ﺍܳـ Bluetooth ݁؇ لᄴᄥ ݆݁ﺍܳފ݄؇۰༟، ݿިﻱ ڣݠڢ Deviceؕ ᄕც؊ّﻭ pairing ﻭﺃ٭ڎ Battery. ﻭᎂﺫﺍ ﺍಣಕᕬݠﺕ Firmware ﺏරජ ،ᄭႍၽލৎ৊ﺍ Updateލ؇ﻥ ෠ຬ޶ ﺃݿྥٴܭ.
> 59.1%  0.836  +0.427
> OpenAI  ﺇﺫﺍ ﺍܳٴߺࠊّިﺙ ݁؇ لܹگޔ ﺍܳފ݄؇۰༟ ݿިﻱ ڣݠڢب ﺩلڰ؇ะ ྵﻭﺃ٭ڎ ਍ಱଫଃً ؐﻭّ؊ᄕც ݆݁ﺍܳٴޚ؇ﺭﻱ ﻭᎂﺫﺍ ﺍಣಕᕬݠﺕ ﺍৎ৊ލරජ ᄭႍၽﺏ ڣଫଃ݁ިߌߵ ﺃ೑ಱࣖࢻލ؇ﻥ ߌߵۏ ؕݿٺ؇ਊಱܭ.
> 45.5%  0.827  +0.281
> Google ۬ ﺍﺫﺍ ﺍܳٴߺࠊّިﺙ ݁؇ ܳگޔ ﺍܳފ݄؇༟ ﺍݿިﻱ ڣިﺭۏ٭ب ﺩلڰ؇ะ ྵﻭﺍ٭ڎ ਍ಱଫଃًھ ﻭﺍّ؇ᄕც ً݆݁؇ߙߵﻱ، ﺍﺫﺍ ﺍಣಕᕬݠﺕ ﺍৎ৊ލᄩႍၽ ﺍරජﺏ ڣଫଃﻡ ﻭߌߵ ﺍ೑ಱࣖࢻލ؇ﻥ ߌߵۏ ؕݿྥ٭ص.
> 77.3%  0.761  +0.534
> Azure  ﺇﺫﺍ ﺍܳٴߺࠊّިﺙ ݁؇ لܹگޔ ﺍܳފ݄؇۰༟ ﺃݿިﻱ ڣݠﻕ ﺍᄴᄟڣྵะ؇، ﻭﺃ٭ڎ ༇ຍଫଃً، ﻭﺃّ؊ᄕც ݆݁ਐಸ؇ﺭ، ﺇﺫﺍ ﺍಣಕᕬݠﺕ ﺍৎ৊ލරජ .ᄭႍၽﺏ ڣଫଃ݁٭ިﺭ ﻭ೑ಱࣖࢻᎂލ؇ﻥ ߌߵۏ ؕݿ྘ص.
> 40.9%  0.833  +0.242
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 24 May 2026 Table 10 – continued
> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> ﺍܳٷب ﺇﺫﺍ ݬ؇ﺭ slow ﻭﺃَ؇ٷڎﻱ ૭૜ܹࡗࡲ، ﺃﻭﻝ ๴ཇ ﺃݿިﻱ ﺃڣݱܭ :troubleshooting ﺍීෂﺍﻭߙߵ ﻭﺃﺭۏأ۬، ﻭﺃނ٭۹ settings، ﻭᎂﺫﺍ ݁؇ َڰ ؕﺃۋިﻝ .quick fix ܋ـ hotspot
> ElevenLabs  ﺍܳٷب ﺇﺫﺍ ݬ؇ﺭ slowٷڎ ૭૜ܹࡗࡲ ﺃﻭﻝ ๴ཇﺀ ﺍݿިﻱ ﺍڣݱܭ .troubleshooting Check۬ ﺍﺭﺩﻩ ݁أ Router ﻭﻝ؇༡ؕ ﺫﺍ ݁؇ َڰᎂﻭ settings .Quick fix ﻙ hotspot
> 54.2%  0.834  +0.375
> OpenAI  ﺍܳٷب ﺇﺫﺍ ݬ؇ﺭ slowٷڎﻙ ﺃﻭﻝ troubleshooting ݿިﻱ ﺀ๴ཇ ﺍڣݱܭ ﺍීෂﺍﻭߙߵ ﻭﺍﺭۏؕލ٭۹ ﻭﻝ؇༡ؕ ﺫﺍ ݁؇ َڰᎂﻭ settings .quick fix ﻙ hotspot
> 45.8%  0.860  +0.318
> Google  ﺍܳٷب ﺍﺫﺍ ݬ؇ﺭ ݿߺࠊٷڎﻱ ૭૜ܹࡗࡲ ﺍﻭﻝ ๴ཇﺀ ﺍݿިﻱ ߙߵﻭًܭ ނި਍ಾھ ﺍڣݱܭ ﺍීෂﺍﻭߙߵ ﻭﺍﺭۏأ ۬ﻭﺍނ٭۹ ݿ྘ٺٷھ ﻭﺍﺫﺍ ݁؇ َڰ ؕﺍ༡؇ﻭﻝ ۱ިﺕ ݿٴިﺕ ܋ܝ ިل۹ ڣ٭ܝݴ.
> 79.2%  0.744  +0.536
> Azure  ﺍܳٷب ﺇﺫﺍ ݬ؇ﺭ ݿߺࠊﻥٷڎ ૭૜ܹࡗࡲ ﺃﻭﻝ ๴ཇﺀ૭૜ ިﻱ ﺍܳଫଐﻭﺏ ይዧލިඔ൹ّ، ﺍڣݱܭ ﺍීෂﺍﻭߙߵ ﻭﺭۏؕ، ﻭᎂﺫﺍ ݁؇ َڰ ༡ؕ؇ﻭﻝ ۱ި૭૜ٴިﻙ ﻭ لܝڰ٭ܝݴ.
> 70.8%  0.794  +0.502
> ﺍܳٺޚٴ٭ݑ لޚ ܹ႟၍ errorؕ ݁؇ ﺃ༡؇ﻭﻝ ﺃݿިﻱ ೑ಸරජ ،login ،ﻭ݁؇ ݪٴޔࣖ ࢴڎ༥ password ڢܹب ஓ୷ܝ ݆server ڣ٭ ۬ݪ؞ޔ، ڣ؇ਐ಻ޙݠﺕ ނިﻱ ﻭݿި೑ಱ ﺍۋٺ۠ب ଫଃ༠৙৑؇ًﻭ ،refresh .۰ਃ಻؇ٔ ﺓਵਦ verfiication
> ElevenLabs  ﺍܳٺޚٴ٭ݑ ݪܭ ଫଃ༟ ﺍܳ۰గၵၽފިﻱ password ೑ಸරජ .Login݆ ༥ڎࢴ ࣖﻭ݁؇ ࿾ேٴ۹. ڢܹب ஓ୷ܝ server ڣ٭ ۬ݪ؞ޔ ڣ؇ਐ಻ޙݠﺕ ሒᇬ؇ًﻭ refresh ೑ಱިل۰ ﻭݿި ނ ﺓਵਦ verfiication ڎ෠ູ ﺭﺍﺡ .۰ਃ಻؇ٔ
> 51.8%  0.854  +0.372
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 25 May 2026 Table 10 – continued
> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> OpenAI  ﺍৎ৊ލৎ৊ ᄭႍၽ؇ ﺍ༡؇ﻭﻝ ﺍݿިﻱ ܳިﻕ ۬ﺍﻥ ೑ಸරජ ً؇ݿިﺭﺩ ༥ڎࢴ ࣖﻭ݁؇ ݪٴޔ ڢܹب ஓ୷ܝ ݆ﺍܳފଫଃڣݠ ڣ٭ ݪ؞ޔ ڣ؇ਐ಻ޙݠﺕ ނިﻱ ﻭݿި೑ಱ ﺭ لڰݠะ ྸﻭଫଃ༠৖৑؇ً ﺍۋٺ۠ب ڣଫଃ لڰܝ྘ލ ݆ਵਦﺓ۰ਃ಻؇ٔ
> 55.6%  0.779  +0.335
> Google  ّޚٴ٭ݑ لޚ ܹؕﺍߌߵﻭﺭ ႟၍ ݁؇ ﺍݿިﻱ ܳިۏ ݆೑ಸරජ ً؇ݿިﺭﺩ ༥ڎࢴ ࣖﻭ݁؇ ݪٴޔ ڢܹب ஓ୷ܝ ݆ݿଫଃڣݠ ሒᇭ ݪ؞ޔ ڣ؇ਐ಻ޙݠﺕ ނިﻱ ﻭݿި೑ಱ ﺭ لڰݠะ ྸﻭଫଃ༠৖৑؇ً ﺍۋٺ؇ﺝ ڣଫଃڣܝ྘ލ ݆ਵਦﻩਃ಻؇ٔ ۬.
> 59.3%  0.784  +0.377
> Azure  ّޚٴ٭ݑ ޗܹਵؕﻭﺽ ႟၍ ݁؇ ﺃݿިﻱ ܳިۏ݆. ೑ಸරජ ً؇ݿިﻭﺭﺩ ༥ڎࢴ ࣖﻭ݁؇ ޖٴޔ ڢڎ ஓ୷ܝ ݆ሒᇭ ݪ؞ޔ. ڣ؇ਐ಻ޙݠﺕ ނ ިل۰ ﻭݿި೑ಱ ﺭ لڰݠྸะ. ﻭً؇ଫଃ༠৙৑ ﺍۋٺ۠ب .۬ਃ಻؇ٔ ﺓਵਦ
> 55.6%  0.807  +0.363
> ڢٴܭ ݁؇ ﺃࣖࢻﺃ ܳأص ﺃނ٭۹ ping ﻭﺃݪٴޔ আॻ༟ loadout ۋފص ﺍܳـ meta، ݁ި৖৑ﺯﻡ rush ﺩﺍቕሹ، teamﻭ ۰ොෘﻭﺍ strategyܾ ۱৙৑ﺍ work ݁ݯٴިﻁލ؇ﻥ ෠ຶ٭ص win َޙ٭ژ.
> ElevenLabs  ڢٴܭ ݁؇ ﺃݪٴޔ ܳأٴ۰ ﺃނ٭۹ ping ܾﻭﺃݪٴޔ আॻ༟ load out ۋފص ۱ﺃ ،؇ஓ୷ﺩﺍ rush ﺯﻡ৖৑، ﻭ  ቕረﺍ teamworkﻭ ۰ොෘﻭﺍ strategy ݁ݯٴިﻁލ؇ﻥ ෠ຶ٭ص win َޙ٭ژ.
> 46.2%  0.888  +0.350
> OpenAI  ڢٴܭ ݁؇ ﺍݪٴޔ ﺍይዧأٴ۰ ނ٭۹ ਍ಸݑ ﻭﺍݪٴޔ ܳިﺩﺍﻭﺕ আॻ༟ ۋފص ﺍৎ৊ٺ؇ ﻭ৖৑ﺯﻡ ﺭﺵ ﺩﺍஓ୷؇ ﺍ۱ ܾﺍݿଫଐﺍ౯౏ళ٭۰ ﻭﺍ۰ොෘ ﻭّࡗࡲ ﻭﻭﺭﻙ ݁ݯٴިﻁ ލ؇ﻥ ෠ຶ٭ص ﻭﻥ َޙ٭ژ
> 65.4%  0.744  +0.398
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 26

May 2026 Table 10 – continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> Google  ڢٴܭ ݁؇ ﺍݪٴޔ ܳأٴ ۬ﺍނ٭۹ ਍ಸھ ܾﻭﺍݪٴޔ ܳިﺩ ﺍﻭﺕ আॻ༟ ۋފص ﺍৎ৊ٺ؇، ݁ި৖৑ﺯﻡ ﺭﺵ ﺩﺍஓ୴؇ ﺍ۱ ﺍݿଫଐﺍ౯౏ళ޶ ﻭﺍොෘ ۬ﻭّࡗࡲ ﻭﺭﻙ ݁ݯٴިﻁލ؇ﻥ ෠ຶ٭ص ﻭદઊ َޙ٭ژ.
> 65.4%  0.754  +0.408
> Azure ި ڢٴܭ ݁؇ ﺍݪٴޔ ܳأٴ۰ ނ٭۹ ౯ౙభ ܾﺍݪٴޔ ܳިﺩިﺕ আॻ༟ ۋފص ﺍปฆৎ৊ ﻭ৖৑ﺯﻡ َأ྘ݷ ﺩﺍஓ୴؇ ﺃ۱ ﺍݿଫଐﺍ౯౏ళ޶ ﻭﺍ۰ොෘ ﻭّࡗࡲ ﻭﻭﺭﻙ ݁ޙٴިﻁލ؇ﻥ ෠ຶ٭ص ﻭદઊ َޙ٭ژ.
> 69.2%  0.735  +0.427 Persian (Farsi)–English  (5 samples with highest WER–BERTScore divergence)
> ܳޚڰ؇ ڢٴܭ ﺍﺯ meeting ًأڎی، ᄊჳ ሏᇓ؇۱ feedback ﺭﻭی ﺩﺍﺩﻡ Ⴄၖﺭ ܔٷچڎ.
> ElevenLabs  ܳޚڰ؇ ًڢٴܭ ﺍﺯ meeting ًأڎی ᄊჳ ሏᇓ؇۱feedback ﺭﻭی ﺩﺍﺩﻩﺍﻡ Ⴄၖﺭ ܔٷچڎ
> 50.0%  0.887  +0.387
> OpenAI  ܳިۚފ؇ﻥ ًأݥ ݁٭ܥ ݆ᄊც ًأڎی ﺭﻭی ݿڰچڎ ۱ࣖࢻ؇ٞ܂ ﺩﺍﺩﻥ Ⴄၖﺭ ܔٷچڎ.
> 75.0%  0.710  +0.460
> Google  ܳޚڰ؇ ًڢٴܭ ﺍﺯ ݁چڎ਍ೋ܁ ًأڎی ﺭﻭی ڣچڎً܂۱؇ᄊჳ ሏᇓ ﺩﺍﺩﻡ Ⴄၖﺭ ܔٷچڎ.
> 33.3%  0.863  +0.196
> Azure  ܳޚڰ؇ ڢٴܭ ﺍﺯ ݁چྥچٷ܁ ًأڎی ﺭﻭی ڣچڎً܂ ۱؇ᄊჳ ሏᇓ ﺩﺍﺩﻡ Ⴄၖﺭ ܔٷچڎ.
> 25.0%  0.895  +0.145
> ﺍ਍ೋگڎﺭ ߓߵﺍی final exam ﺍݿଫଐﺱ ﺩﺍﺭﻡ ᄊჳ ﺍݬஓ஁ ఈఃچٺިቕቃ ﺭﻭی ﺩﺭݿ؇ﻡ focus ܔࡡࡲ.
> ElevenLabs  ﺍ਍ೋگڎﺭ ߓߵﺍی ڣچٷ؇ﻝ ﺍ஼஫ﺍﻡ ﺍݿଫଐﺱ ﺩﺍﺭﻡ ᄊჳ ﺍݬஓ஁ ఈః޳ّިቕቃ ﺭﻭی ﺩﺭﺱ۱؇ﻡ ڣިܔݴ ܔࡡࡲ
> 53.8%  0.848  +0.386
> OpenAI  ﺍ਍ೋگڎﺭ ߓߵﺍی ڣ؇਍ೋ؇ﻝ ﺍ஼஫ﻡ ﺍݿଫଐﺱ ﺩﺍﺭﻡ ᄊჳ ﺍݬஓ஁ ఈః޳ّިቕቃ ﺭﻭی ﺩﺭݿ؇ﻡ ڣިܔިﺱ ܔࡡࡲ.
> 38.5%  0.883  +0.267
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

27 May 2026 Table 10 – continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> Google  ﺍદતڢڎﺭ ߓߵﺍی ڣ؇਍ೋ؇ﻝ ﺍ஼஫ﺍﻡ ﺍݿଫଐﺱ ﺩﺍﺭﻡ ᄊჳ ﺍݬஓ஁ً ఈః޳ّިቕቃ ﺭﻭی ﺩﺭﺱ۱؇ﻡ ڣިܔިﺱ ܔࡡࡲ.
> 76.9%  0.876  +0.645
> Azure  ﺍ਍ೋگڎﺭ ߓߵﺍی ڣ؇ٞܭਲ਼ߦ߳ﻡ ﺍݿଫଐﺱ ﺩﺍﺭﻡ ᄊჳ ﺍݬஓ஁ ఈఃچٺިቕቃ ﺭﻭی ﺩﺭݿ؇ﻡ ڣܦݴ ܔࡡࡲ.
> 23.1%  0.901  +0.132
> skillࣖ࣎ ڎ༥ character દતﺍࣖ࣎ ۱؇ی ۊچউॻ ۊڰพฃ ﺩﺍﺭﻩ، ً؇ ۋٺ݄؇ unlockً ﺍﺵ ܔࡡࡲ.
> ElevenLabs  ی؇۱Skillࣖ࣎ ڎ༥ ଫଐﺭﺍܔႤၖ દતﺍ ۊچউॻ ۊڰพฃ ﺩﺍﺭﻩ ً؇ ࣖ࣎ۋٺ݄؇ Unlockﺵ ܔࡡࡲ
> 53.8%  0.847  +0.385
> OpenAI  ﺍႤၖ દતﺭﺍܔ༥ ଫଐڎࣖ࣎ ﺍݿ൪ിܭ۱؇ی ۊچউॻ ۊڰพฃ ﺩﺍﺭﻩ، ً؇ ࣖ࣎ۋٺ݄؇ ﺁఈఃَܔݷ ܔࡡࡲ.
> 38.5%  0.859  +0.244
> Google  ًﺍႤၖ દતﺭﺍܔ༥ ଫଐڎࣖ࣎ ﺍݿ൪ിܭ۱؇ی ۊچউॻ ۊڰพฃ ﺩﺍﺭﻩ ً؇ ࣖ࣎ۋٺ݄؇ ﺁఈఃَکﺍﺵ ܔࡡࡲ.
> 30.8%  0.844  +0.152
> Azure  ۱؇ی ܭ൪ിﺍݿࣖ࣎ ڎ༥ ଫଐܔா஬ દતﺍ ۊچউॻ ۊڰ ݆ﺩﺍﺭﻩ ً؇ ࣖ࣎ۋٺ݄؇ ৖৑ܔݷ ܔٷڎ.
> 61.5%  0.811  +0.426 ًఈః݁Ⴄၖ ݁چۛިﺍﻡ weekend દતﺍ movie ؇ّܔࡡࡲ ﻭ ۚٷڎ chill ༥ڎྟྲྀࣖ࣎ چࡡࡲ.
> ElevenLabs ً ఈః݁Ⴄၖ ۊިﺍﻡሏᇧ weekend દતﺍ ۚچܭ ܔࡡࡲ ﻭ ۚٷڎ ّ؇ movie ༥ڎྟྲྀࣖ࣎ چࡡࡲ
> 45.5%  0.909  +0.364
> OpenAI  ﺍદત ﻭ ٞܦٷڎ ༠؇َިﺍﺩﻩﺍ݁ލچޚ؇਍಻ڎ ﻭ ۚٷڎّ؇ ዛᔻ݄ިی ༥؇ܳص ྱྲྀٷٷڎ.
> 72.7%  0.706  +0.434
> Google  ࣖ࣎ﺍદત ﻭ ٞܦٷڎ ሏᇧۊިﺍﻡ Ⴄၖ݁ఈః ًۚچܭ ܔࡡࡲ ﻭ ۚٷڎ ّ؇ ݁ިﻭی ༥ڎ ྟྲྀچࡡࡲ.
> 63.6%  0.873  +0.510
> Azure ۬ ﺍદત ﻭ ٞܦٷڎ ݁چۛިﺍﻡ Ⴄၖ݁༰ ఈః ܔࡡࡲ ۚٷڎّ؇ ݁ި༥ ሏᇓڎྟྲྀࣖ࣎ چࡡࡲ.
> 45.5%  0.820  +0.275
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

28 May 2026 Table 10 – continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> উॻۊچࣖ࣎ ڎ༥ influencer દતﺍ ،۬ܔٷ ሏᇧ ّިܳچڎ พ฀؇ܳ༥ content ᆇᆅ۬ ﺵ ﺭﻭ ﺩਊ಻؇ﻝ ሏᇧܔࡡࡲ.
> ElevenLabs  ﺍદત ﺍ਍ೋڰߺࠊ༥ ๤ཏྡྷཬڎࣖ࣎ ۊچউॻ ༥ content؇ܳพ฀ ّިܳچڎ ݁چܦٷ۬. ᆇᆅݷ ﺭﻭ ﺩਊ಻؇ﻝ ݁چܦࡡࡲ
> 46.7%  0.857  +0.324
> OpenAI  ﺍદત ﺍ਍ೋڰߺࠊ༥ ๤ཏྡྷཬڎࣖ࣎ ۊچউॻ ྥཹႤၖٷب ༥؇ܳพ฀ ّިܳچڎ ሏᇧܔٷ۬. ᆇᆅݷ ﺭﻭ ﺩਊ಻؇ﻝ ሏᇧܔࡡࡲ.
> 33.3%  0.876  +0.209
> Google  ﺍદત ﺍ਍ೋڰߺࠊ༥ ๤ཏྡྷཬڎࣖ࣎ ۊچউॻ ྥཹႤၖٷب ༥؇ܳพ฀ ّިܳچڎ ሏᇧܔٷ۬. ᆇᆅ۬ ނ ިﺩਊ಻؇ﻝ ሏᇧ ܔࡡࡲ.
> 33.3%  0.871  +0.205
> Azure  ۬ﺍદત ىܭٷ༥ ๤ཡڎࣖ࣎ ۊچউॻ Ⴄၖ݁ٷب ༥؇ܳพ฀ ّިܳچڎ ݁چܦٷ ᆇᆅݷ ﺭﺍ ﺩਊ಻؇ﻝ ݁چܦٷٷڎ.
> 66.7%  0.836  +0.502 German–English  (5 samples with highest WER–BERTScore divergence)
> Ich habe nächste Woche einen  appointment  für einen allgemeinen check-up beim Arzt. ElevenLabs  Ich habe nächste Woche ein  Appointment  für einen  allgemeinen Checkup beim Arzt.
> 23.1%  0.946  +0.177
> OpenAI  Ich habe nächste Woche ein  Appointment  für einen  allgemeinen Check-up beim Arzt. 7.7%  0.962  +0.038 Google  Ich habe nächste Woche einen  Appointment  für einen allgemeinen Check-up beim Arzt. 0.0%  0.965  -0.035 Azure  Ich habe nächste Woche einen  appointment für  einen  allgemeinen Checkup beim Arzt.
> 15.4%  0.949  +0.102
> Deepgram  Ich habe nächste Woche ein  Appointment  für einen  allgemeinen Check-up beim Arzt. 7.7%  0.962  +0.038 Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

29 May 2026 Table 10 – continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> Für das Meeting morgen müssen wir die key take-aways  nochmal  genau durchgehen. ElevenLabs  Für das Meeting morgen müssen wir die Key Take-aways  noch  mal  genau durchgehen.
> 16.7%  0.975  +0.142
> OpenAI  Für das Meeting morgen müssen wir die Key Take-aways  nochmal  genau durchgehen. 0.0%  0.983  -0.017 Google  Für das Meeting morgen müssen wir die Key Take-aways  noch  mal  genau durchgehen.
> 16.7%  0.975  +0.142
> Azure  Für das Meeting morgen müssen wir die Key Tech raise  noch  mal  genau durchgehen.
> 33.3%  0.930  +0.263
> Deepgram  Für das Meeting morgen müssen wir die Key Take-aways  nochmal  genau durchgehen. 0.0%  0.983  -0.017 My doctor said I need to get a Bluttest to check my iron levels. ElevenLabs  My doctor said I need to get a blood test to check my iron levels.
> 14.3%  0.967  +0.110
> OpenAI  My doctor said I need to get a blood test to check my iron levels.
> 14.3%  0.967  +0.110
> Google  My doctor said I need to get a blood test to check my iron levels.
> 14.3%  0.967  +0.110
> Azure  My Doctor. I need to get a blood test to check my iron levels.
> 21.4%  0.913  +0.128
> Deepgram  My doctor said I need to get a blood test to check my iron levels.
> 14.3%  0.967  +0.110
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

30 May 2026 Table 10 – continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> Wir haben ein Upgrade auf eine Suite mit king-size bed und tollem sea view bekommen. ElevenLabs  Wir  haben  ein  Up-grade  auf  eine  Suite mit  Kingsize-Bett  und tollem Sea View bekom-men.
> 18.8%  0.917  +0.105
> OpenAI  Wir haben ein Upgrade auf  eine  Suite  mit Kingsize-Bett und Dorm Sea View bekommen.
> 25.0%  0.889  +0.139
> Google  Wir haben ein Upgrade auf  eine  Suite  mit Kingsize-Bett und Dolm Sea View bekommen.
> 25.0%  0.891  +0.141
> Azure  Wir haben ein Upgrade auf eine Suite mit King Size Bad. Dorm C View become an.
> 37.5%  0.821  +0.196
> Deepgram  Wir haben ein Upgrade auf eine Suite mit King-size Bett und Dorm Sea View bekommen. 12.5%  0.926  +0.051 We should plan a proper Kaffeeklatsch soon, with lots  of  cake  and  extra Sahne. ElevenLabs  We should plan a proper coffee klatch soon, with lots  of  cake  and  extra Sahne. 14.3%  0.949  +0.092 OpenAI  We  should  planen  aproper  Kaffeeklatsch soon,  with lots of cake and extra Sahne. 7.1%  0.980  +0.051 Google  We should plan a proper coffee klatsch soon with a lot of cake and extra Sahne.
> 28.6%  0.928  +0.214
> Azure  We should pläne proper kaffee klatscht duon with a lots of cake and extra sahne.
> 42.9%  0.823  +0.252
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

31 May 2026 Table 10 – continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  ∆
> Deepgram  We should plan a proper Kaffeeklatch soon,  with lots  of  cake  and  extra Sahne. 7.1%  0.994  +0.065
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

32