Title: NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.01960v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Jul 2026 00:50:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
July, 2026 

# NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track 

Marcely Zanon Boito 1, Hemant Yadav 2, Jean-Luc Meunier 1, Ioan Calapodescu 1

> 1

NAVER LABS Europe, France 

> 2

IIIT Delhi, India 

Figure 1: Our training pipeline. A speech projector (SpeechMapper) (A) and text LoRA adapters (B) are trained in parallel using ASR and text-to-text data, respectively. These modules are then integrated during a brief multimodal adaptation step (C). 

## Abstract 

In this paper, we describe NAVER LABS Europe’s submission to the instruction-following speech pro-cessing short track at IWSLT 2026. We participate again in the constrained setting, developing systems capable of jointly performing ASR, ST, and SQA from English speech into Chinese, Italian, and Ger-man. Building on our previous submission, ranked first in last year’s short track, we update our multi-stage training pipeline by replacing the speech projector with SpeechMapper , a method for learning a speech-to-LLM embedding projector using only ASR data. In addition, we introduce a synthetic SQA dataset, fakACL , composed of artificially generated scientific presentations. This dataset is built by prompting the LLM backbone, segmenting the generated talks, and synthesizing speech with SeamlessM4T-v2-large . The combination of an improved speech projection mechanism and domain-specific synthetic data allows our model to outperform last year’s best short-track system, while being considerably more compact and relying on a weaker LLM backbone. This year’s results place our system tied for first place in the overall short track ranking. 

## 1. Introduction 

Fueled by the progress of text-only LLMs, a growing number of speech-based assistants have recently been proposed, addressing both semantic [ 2 , 4, 7, 12 , 19 , 21 ]and acoustic speech tasks [ 8 , 13 , 26 ]. In this context, the second edition of the IWSLT Instruction-following Speech Processing Track [ 1] provides a common bench-mark for developing speech assistants capable of per-forming semantic tasks directly from speech. The chal-lenge proposes to leverage LLMs and speech foundation 

> Corresponding author: marcely.zanon-boito@naverlabs.com
> arXiv:2607.01960v1 [cs.CL] 2 Jul 2026 NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track

models (SFMs) to build systems that can perform mul-tilingual tasks from English speech input, guided by textual multilingual instructions. NAVER LABS Europe (NLE) again participates in the constrained setting of the short track , which includes automatic speech recognition (ASR), speech transla-tion (ST), multilingual spoken question answering (SQA), and a surprise instruction-following task re-vealed only at test time. The target languages for ST and SQA are Chinese, Italian, and German. The target languages for the surprise task were German and Chinese. Participants are allowed to use the 

SeamlessM4T-v2-large [3] speech backbone and the Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 [23 ] LLM for both training and data generation. Building on our previous winning submission [ 10 ], we adopt a similar multi-stage training pipeline to develop a speech LLM capable of following multilingual instructions. Our approach trains two components in parallel: (1) a speech-to-text projector that maps averaged speech rep-resentations from the SeamlessM4T-v2-large en-coder into the embedding space of a frozen LLM, and (2) text-only LoRA adapters [ 6 ] applied to the same frozen LLM. These components are subsequently com-bined through a (3) short SFT stage on multimodal mul-tilingual data. Compared to last year, we introduce two main improvements. First, we replace the speech pro-jector with an updated version of SpeechMapper [ 12 ], which enables learning a speech-to-embedding map-ping without requiring LLM forward passes, substan-tially lowering computational and hardware require-ments. Second, we construct a synthetic scientific dataset, fakACL , to reduce the domain gap between training and evaluation data. This system paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the preprocessing applied to the data used in this challenge. Section 3 presents the updated 

SpeechMapper model we leverage in this work. Sec-tions 4 and 5 describe our training pipeline and ex-perimental settings, respectively. Section 6 presents our experiments and discussion. Section 7 presents the submitted system. Section 8 concludes the paper. 

## 2. Data 

We leverage all available data from the constrained setting for training, including CoVoST2 [ 25 ], Eu-roParlST [ 9 ], GigaST [ 27 ], and LibriSQA [ 28 ]. This data is also synthetically augmented to cover addi-tional target languages via SeamlessM4T-v2-large 

MT. In addition, we introduce fakACL , a synthetic dataset of scientific presentations generated by prompt-ing the LLM backbone and synthesizing the outputs with SeamlessM4T-v2-large TTS. The validation sets of EuroParlST, CoVoST2, and LibriSQA are used for model validation, while MCIF [ 15 ] is used for final model selection. We now present our data preprocessing (Section 2.1) and prompt format (Section 2.2). 

2.1. Data Preprocessing 

We create both speech-to-text and text-to-text instruc-tions to train our systems. Appendix Table 5 lists our splits and number of samples. In all cases where syn-thetic translation is generated from English text, this procedure is done via SeamlessM4T-v2-large MT followed by filtering of the result using reference-free COMET 1 [18 ] to filter out all translations that did not score at least 0.85. Below we detail dataset-specific preprocessing. 

GigaST, CoVoST2 and EuroParlST CoVoST2 and Gi-gaST cover English to German and Simplified Chi-nese language directions. EuroParlST covers English to German and Italian. ASR splits for CoVoST2 and EuroParlST datasets were built by merging the existing language splits and de-duplicating the audio files. For all, language-specific ST and MT splits were created by aligning translations to English speech and reference transcriptions, respectively. For GigaST, and because our LLM backbone is particularly weak in Italian (see Table 1), we produce additional synthetic Italian trans-lations. 

LibriSQA LibriSQA is built on the 300-hour split of Lib-riSpeech [ 14 ]. The dataset is divided in PartI and PartII ,which share the same speech content, but differ in the format of the questions and answers. PartI consists of direct questions to be the answered by the system, while 

PartII presents multiple-choice questions (MCQ) corre-sponding to those in PartI . We performed the following modifications to this dataset: 

• MCQ answer expansion: For PartII , answers are provided as the letter corresponding to the correct option. This results in a very limited number of tokens contributing to the loss, which we found to be suboptimal in past experiments. To address this, we expand the target answers to include the full option text (e.g., instead of predicting “A”, the model is trained to produce “A <option A text>”). 

• Multilingual SQA/QA: We translate the English text into the three target languages. For PartI , we retain only question-answer pairs whose both trans-lations exceed the quality threshold. For PartII , we 

> 1Unbabel/wmt22-cometkiwi-da
> 2NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track

translate only the questions and their associated answer options, since the correct answer is implic-itly defined by the options. We then apply a pars-ing step to discard examples where the A–B–C–D structure is altered or lost during translation. This parser also recovers the correct answer by aligning the translated options with the original references. 

• MT split: We create an MT split for each target lan-guage by exploiting the alignment between ques-tions and answers obtained during the creation of our SQA split. We do not create a corresponding ST split, as we consider this dataset to be significantly out-of-domain for the challenge, particularly in terms of acoustic conditions, and including more of it could be detrimental during training. 

• Similarity-based Invalid splits: Some questions in LibriSQA are relatively broad (e.g., “How did the person in the text act?”), making it difficult to reliably mismatch them with unrelated audio seg-ments. To address this, we construct mismatched pairs by selecting question–transcript combina-tions with low semantic similarity. We first shuf-fle and randomly pair transcripts and questions, then compute sentence-level representations using a Sentence Transformer 2 to measure cosine sim-ilarity between them. We retain only pairs with low similarity scores. 3 This process yields 48,346 and 58,682 mismatched pairs for PartI and PartII ,respectively. 

• Qwen-based Invalid splits: To address poten-tial noise introduced by our similarity-based in-valid splits we created, we include a more general-purpose set of invalid questions by prompting 

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 (see Appendix A.1 for details). After post-processing, this yields 62,040 English questions, which are then trans-lated and filtered for quality using the same proce-dure described above. Finally, these questions are randomly paired with speech audio segments to construct the invalid splits. 

fakACL In both this and the previous edition of the challenge, the validation data is drawn from scien-tific paper presentations at ACL conferences. Mo-tivated by this, we constructed a synthetic dataset targeting this domain to reduce the mismatch be-tween training and test conditions, and to provide additional relevant QA data, as the constrained SQA dataset is relatively distant from the test setting. We generated fakACL ASR/ST/SQA data by first produc-ing short presentation scripts for NLP papers using   

> 2sentence-transformers/multi-qa-MiniLM-L6-cos-v1
> 3Based on manual assessment, we set this to ≤0.1.

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 . These scripts were seg-mented into chunks of two to three sentences and syn-thesized into speech using SeamlessM4T-v2-large 

TTS. Each segment transcript was then fed back into the LLM to generate two questions answerable from the corresponding content. Appendix A.2 provides full details of the dataset creation process. 

2.2. Prompt Format 

The goal of the short track of this challenge is to produce a model that is able to 1) transcribe English speech; 2) translate English speech into Italian, German and Chi-nese; 3) Answer multilingual questions using English speech as input. In this setting, the language of the question must match the language of the answer. Last year we designed an unified prompt with consistent structure: regardless of the task (ASR, ST, or SQA), the user turn begins by encapsulating the speech embed-dings within textual tags. This is followed on a new line by a task-specific instruction formulated as a question in the target language, and finally, another line containing a common suffix. Our last year results [ 10 ] highlighted that by forcing the instruction (i.e. question) to be in the target language, we were able to reduce confusion between the tasks of ASR/ST, while also helping the system to generalize to languages it was not originally trained for. 4 Therefore, this year we only experiment with this setting, in which the instruction is given in the target language. We additionally include a template for multiple choice questions (MCQ), for the surprise task, and for zero-shot generation (LLM backbone and SpeechMapper 

in projector-only mode). The list of updated templates used is available in Appendix Table 7. 

## 3. Speech Projector: SpeechMapper 

In this work we use an improved version of the origi-nal SpeechMapper projector [ 12 ]. SpeechMapper is a speech-to-LLM embedding projector for semantic infor-mation, and training it only requires an LLM’s tokenizer and its embedding layer. The benefits are twofold: (1) the size of LLM does not increase GPU memory required for training; 5 (2) it mitigates prompt over-fitting. We refer the reader to the original paper for further details.   

> 4For instance, in the SpeechMapper paper [ 12 ], our IWSLT25 sys-tem generalizes to Spanish and French ST via multilingual prompting, despite the fact that its LoRA weights were never trained on these languages.
> 5The only increase in computational cost comes from the embed-ding dimensionality, which is typically not proportional to the LLM size, keeping the approach computationally efficient. 3NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track

The decision to replace last year’s simple trans-former based projector with the more parameter-heavy 

SpeechMapper is primarily motivated by practical con-siderations. In preliminary experiments, we attempted to reproduce the pipeline from Lee et al. [10] , but ob-served very poor performance for projector-only mod-els (exceeding 200% WER). We attribute this low-performance compared to last year to the lower dimen-sionality of the embedding space in this year’s LLM. We hypothesize that projecting into a smaller embedding space requires higher precision, and therefore greater model capacity, which SpeechMapper is better able to provide. Below, we describe our main modification to 

SpeechMapper relative to Mohapatra et al. [12] : the training objective. 

3.1. New SpeechMapper Training Objective 

Our updated version of SpeechMapper is trained us-ing four loss functions designed to align speech to LLM input embeddings. Speech is encoded into a sequence of embeddings 𝑍 𝑠 ∈ ℝ𝑇 ×𝑑 using the frozen SFM and fed to the SpeechMapper . The corresponding target sen-tence is processed to a sequence of LLM token embed-dings 𝑍 𝑡 ∈ ℝ𝑇 ′ ×𝑑 using the frozen LLM embedding layer. The resulting speech sequence length 𝑇 is significantly larger than the text sequence length 𝑇 ′. To mitigate this length mismatch, we pad the target embedding sequence with the LLMs [PAD] token embedding to match the speech sequence length (Eq. 1).  

> 𝑍 𝑡

= [𝑧 (1)   

> 𝑡 , . . . , 𝑧 (𝑇 ′)
> 𝑡 , 𝑧 pad , . . . , 𝑧 pad

] ∈ ℝ𝑇 ×𝑑 (1) Therefore, the output of SpeechMapper is semantic embeddings followed by pad embeddings, implicitly capturing sequence length. We optimize the following objectives. 

L1 Alignment Loss The element wise L1 distance between speech and text embeddings explicitly en-force feature-level alignment between the two modali-ties (Eq. 2). This loss replaces the MSE loss from Mo-hapatra et al. [12]. 

LL1 = 1

> 𝑇𝑑
> 𝑇

∑︁  

> 𝑡 =1
> 𝑧 (𝑡 )
> 𝑠

− 𝑧 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑡

(2) 

Cosine Similarity Loss To encourage angular align-ment in the embedding space, we keep the original cosine similarity loss from the original paper, and mini-mize the cosine distance between corresponding speech and text representations (Eq. 3). 

Lcos = 1

> 𝑇
> 𝑇

∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =1

1 − 𝑧 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑠

· 𝑧 (𝑡 )

> 𝑡

∥𝑧 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑠

∥2 ∥𝑧 (𝑡 ) 

> 𝑡

∥2

!

(3) 

Softmax Contrastive Loss To enforce separation from non target tokens, we use softmax function to maximize similarity to the positive class embeddings and minimize similarity to all other embeddings. Let  

> 𝐸

∈ ℝ𝑉 ×𝑑 denotes the LLM’s embedding layer, where 𝑉 

is the vocabulary size. For each speech representation  

> 𝑧 (𝑡 )
> 𝑠

, we compute cosine similarity scores with all embed-dings and use these as logits, with 𝑠 𝑡 ∈ ℝ𝑉 and 𝑦 𝑡 ∈ ℝ𝑉 

denoting respectively the logits and the one-hot vector corresponding to the target token at position 𝑡 (Eq. 4). The negative log likelihood encourages SpeechMapper 

output embeddings to be close to its correct token em-bedding while remaining well separated from all other tokens in the vocabulary. 

Lsoftmax = − 1

> 𝑇
> 𝑇

∑︁  

> 𝑡 =1
> 𝑦 ⊤
> 𝑡

log (softmax (𝑠 𝑡 )) (4) 

Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) We found that adding CTC [ 5 ] loss ( Lctc ) at an intermedi-ate layer helps in stabilizing SpeechMapper ’s training and output embeddings quality. 

Final Objective The overall training objective is a weighted sum of the losses: 

L = LL1 + L cos + 0.1 ∗ L softmax + L ctc (5) 

## 4. Training Pipeline 

Our training pipeline is illustrated in Figure 1. We first train two components in parallel: (A) a SpeechMapper speech-to-embedding projector using ASR data, and (B) text LoRA weights using MT and QA data. These components are subsequently reloaded and jointly adapted on a mixture of speech and text tasks (C). In this section, we describe the key components of this training pipeline. 

Foundation Models For speech, we leverage 

SeamlessM4T-v2-large model, extracting speech representations for all our audio data from its 24th speech encoder layer (i.e. the last layer). Prior to training, we average every two consecutive frame vectors, reducing significantly the sequence length. We highlight a minor difference from last year’s setup: we average two consecutive frame vectors instead of three. Prior experiments with SpeechMapper motivated this choice, indicating that a lighter compression 

> 4NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track

before the projector’s CNN layers yields better perfor-mance. All our models are built on top of a frozen 

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 .

SpeechMapper Settings Our SpeechMapper fol-lows the architecture described in Mohapatra et al. [12] ,comprising two consecutive blocks, each consisting of a CNN, N self-attention layers, and a feed-forward projec-tion to a higher dimensional space. To accommodate a CTC head at the end of the first block, we modify the convolutional strides from the original setting of 2 in both blocks to 1 and 4 for the first and second blocks, respectively. We train the model with 𝑁 = 6, using ini-tial, intermediate, and output dimensionalities of 1024 ,

2048 , and 2560 , respectively. 

LoRA Adapters LoRA adaptation [ 6] is applied to both the self-attention (Q/K values, output projection) and feed-forward modules, and across all LLM layers. We use 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 = 8, 𝛼 = 16 . We do not use dropout. 

Data Sampling Strategy For training the models in Figure 1 (B) and (C), we define an epoch as 𝑋 steps across the dataset, where 𝑋 = |speech_examples | 

> batch_size

. To con-struct the data for each epoch, batches are sampled by first applying the predefined task-level sampling ratios, followed by sampling according to domain-level splits within each task. In the multimodal training setting (speech and text tasks mixed), we consider speech as our main modality, using it for defining epoch size and task sampling ratio. Whenever a sampled speech task and language pair has a textual counterpart (e.g., ST corresponds to MT; SQA to QA), we also sample a batch from the corresponding textual task. In practice, this results in alternating batches, such that a sampled ST en-de batch is followed by an MT en-de batch. We find that incorporating textual data in this manner consis-tently improves the final model performance. 

## 5. Experimental Settings 

Codebase We train our models using an internal fork of torchtune [24 ], which allows us to process inter-leaved representations of text and high-dimensional vectors within the user turn during instruction tun-ing. We also implement our updated version of 

SpeechMapper on this codebase. For multimodal training, the high-dimensional vectors pass through 

SpeechMapper , while the text prefix and suffix user prompts are processed by the LLM embedding layer. The obtained speech and text embeddings are both concatenated and fed into the first layer of the LLM which is trained on the masked input with standard cross-entropy loss. Different learning rate schedulers and optimizers are employed for SpeechMapper and the LoRA weights, allowing for more controlled and effective training of these distinct model components. 

Inference Settings We perform inference using 

torchtune , with a batch size of 1, greedy decoding, and with the maximum number of new tokens limited to 100. This decoding strategy was consistently applied across all experimental settings. 

Evaluation Metrics We evaluate our models on speech (ASR, ST, SQA) and text (MT, QA) tasks when relevant. For ASR, we score word error rate (WER) us-ing HuggingFace evaluate library with default settings and MMS normalization [ 16 ]. For ST/MT we score COMET [ 18 ]. 6 For SQA/QA, we use LLM-as-a-judge evaluation scripts from the bergen library 7 [17 ]. We use their “yes/no” quality assessment evaluation format including the reference question and answer, and generated output. We report average accuracy across three LLMs: EuroLLM-9B-Instruct [11 ], 

Gemma3-12B-Instruct , and 

Gemma3-27B-Instruct [22]. 

Baselines We compare our results with both backbones we use for training. We evalu-ate MT using the reference transcripts and 

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 in zero-shot settings, and we evaluate SeamlessM4T-v2-large for ASR, ST and MT. Additionally, we present results for last year’s best short track system, referring to it as 

BEST-IWSLT25-IF [10]. 

## 6. Experiments 

We now present our results for ASR, ST, and SQA. Sec-tion 6.1 introduces the models used in our experiments, followed by results and discussion in Section 6.2. 

6.1. Our Models 

SpeechMapper We train SpeechMapper on ASR data from CoVoST2, EuroParlST, GigaST, and LibriSQA, without applying any up-sampling. Training is per-formed for 500k steps using AdamW with a learning rate of 1𝑒 − 4 and 50k warm-up steps. We employ dy-namic batching with gradient accumulation set to 2. As 

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 does not provide a dedi-cated padding token, we use the reserved (untrained) token 151664 for padding. The model is trained on 

4×A100-80GB GPUs for approximately two days. 

> 6Unbabel/wmt22-comet-da
> 7https://github.com/naver/bergen
> 5NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track

Model ASR (WER) ST/MT (COMET) SQA/QA (LLM-as-judge) 

en-de en-it en-zh Part I Part II 

Text-only Models (zero-shot LLMs, SFM and LoRA) 

SeamlessM4T-v2-large (MT) - 81.4 86.7 80.8 - -

Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct - 81.9 84.1 77.0 86.6 70.8 

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 - 71.0 67.7 74.3 89.1 70.2 

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 + LoRA (B) - 80.7 86.9 84.7 89.9 82.6 

SFM and Projector-only Model 

SeamlessM4T-v2-large (ASR/ST) 5.9 78.3 76.9 78.0 - -

SpeechMapper (A) 14.2 73.5 80.1 79.7 84.4 72.1 

Multimodally Trained Models 

BEST-IWSLT25-IF 7.3 77.3 84.2 80.2 82.0 63.0 

SpeechMapper + LoRA (C) setup 1 8.2 75.1 83.2 80.6 86.2 82.5 

SpeechMapper + LoRA (C) setup 2 7.4 76.3 84.4 81.3 87.9 80.2 

Table 1: Results for ASR (LibriSpeech clean/other, EuroParlST, CoVoST2), ST/MT (CoVoST2, EuroParlST), and SQA/QA (LibriSQA PartI and PartII). ASR and ST/MT scores are reported as weighted averages across datasets, proportional to the number of samples, while SQA/QA results are averaged across judges and reported as accuracy.                   

> Model ASR ST SQA
> BEST-IWSLT25-IF 12.6 0.743 0.417
> SpeechMapper (A) 32.2 0.711 0.225
> SpeechMapper + LoRA (C) setup 1 12.0 0.772 0.428
> SpeechMapper + LoRA (C) setup 2 10.5 0.781 0.400

Table 2: Averaged MCIF scores for all speech models. 

B. Text-only LoRA (MT/QA) The LoRA weights (B) are trained on all available real and synthetic data from Appendix Table 5, with task-level sampling ratios of 0.6 and 0.4 for MT and SQA, respectively. For MT, language sampling ratios are set to 0.4/0.3/0.3 for de/it/zh, while for QA they are 0.2/0.3/0.3/0.2 for en/de/it/zh. We train for 30k steps using AdamW with learning rate of 3𝑒 − 4, weight decay of 0.1, and 100 

warm-up steps. Batch size of 16 , and gradient accumu-lation of 8 is used. This model trains for approximately 4 days in a single A100-80GB. 

C. Multimodal (A + B) We restart training by reload-ing both modules described above. We explore var-ious combinations of the available datasets and ob-tain the best performance with the configuration de-tailed in Appendix Table 6. We use task-level sampling ratios of 0.3/0.4/0.3 for ASR, ST, and SQA, respec-tively. For ST/MT, language sampling ratios are set to 0.4/0.4/0.2 for de/it/zh. For SQA/QA, we use uni-form language sampling over the four languages, as-signing a ratio of 0.2 each for the valid set and 0.05 each for the invalid set. We use learning rate of 5𝑒 − 5

for the SpeechMapper , and of 1𝑒 − 5 for the LoRA weights (setup 1) or 5𝑒 − 5 for the LoRA weights (setup 2). We use a batch size of 8, and gradient accumulation of 6. This model trains for 3K steps, approximately 2 hours in a single A100-80GB. 

6.2. Results and Discussion 

Table 1 present results for ASR, ST/MT and SQA/QA for all of our models and baselines over the available test splits. For ASR, we evaluate using EuroParl, CoVoST and Librispeech clean/other. For ST/MT, we evaluate on EuroParl and CoVoST, excluding GigaST which we find to be particularly noisy. SQA/QA results cover only English, and are an average over scores obtained for the different LLM-as-judge models. Table 2 present MCIF scores (ASR, ST and multilingual SQA) obtained for the speech models. Below we discuss our main findings. 

MT Results Looking at the MT results for text-only models (top portion of Table 1), we ob-serve that this year’s backbone performs substan-tially worse than SeamlessM4T-v2-large and 

Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct . This is expected, as the backbone has roughly half the parameters of last year’s LLM. Results are particularly poor for Italian, motivat-ing us to up-sample this language during fine-tuning. Finally, we also present results for our best LoRA set-ting, which considerably improves performance across both MT and QA tasks. 

> 6

NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track 

Projector-only Results We present results for our best SpeechMapper configuration trained to produce 

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 embeddings. Overall, this setting proves challenging: the LLM appears partic-ularly sensitive to noise in the input embeddings, espe-cially compared to larger backbones tested in Mohapa-tra et al. [12] . Our best SpeechMapper setup performs correctly in in-domain settings (Table 1), but we find it to under-perform considerably in the MCIF dataset (Ta-ble 2), where it handles poorly named entities. In addi-tion, zero-shot usage of Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 

is difficult, as the model reorganizes and/or rephrases the transcription text in many instances, or responds in an overly verbose manner, both cases negatively af-fect evaluation scores. Qualitative examples illustrating these behaviors are provided in Appendix Table 8. 

Multimodal Models We experiment with a wide range of dataset combinations and sampling strategies, and report results only for our best-performing multi-modal models (bottom portion of Table 1 and Table 2). These models are able to match the performance of last year’s system, despite relying on a smaller LLM backbone. Overall, we find that improving performance jointly on ASR and SQA is more challenging this year, as gains in one task often come at the expense of the other. This trade-off is illustrated by Setups 1 and 2: while Setup 1 achieves better results on LibriSQA Part II (MCQ) and MCIF’s SQA, Setup 2 yields stronger per-formance on ASR and ST. 

## 7. Submitted Model 

We select our model based on its MCIF performance. Overall, we were unable to produce a single run that achieves the best score across all tasks, as improvements in one task tend to degrade performance in others. Therefore, we prioritize SQA as our primary task and use it as the key criterion for model selection. Based on Table 2, we submit setup 1 as our main submission. We also resubmit BEST-IWSLT-IF as a contrastive, uncon-strained system. Our competition results are discussed in Appendix Section A.3. 

## 8. Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented NLE’s submission to the instruction-following speech processing short track at IWSLT 2026 under the constrained setting. We devel-oped multimodal models capable of jointly perform-ing ASR, ST, and SQA from English speech into Chi-nese, German, and Italian. Building on our previ-ous pipeline [ 10 ], we replaced the transformer-based speech projector with an updated SpeechMapper pro-jector [ 12 ]. We also introduced a synthetic dataset of scientific talks, fakACL , to mitigate domain mismatch between training and evaluation. Despite relying on a substantially smaller LLM backbone, our final system outperforms last year’s best submission in the short track. 

## References 

[1] David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Antonios Anastasopoulos, Vic-tor Agostinelli, Luisa Bentivogli, Ondřej Bojar, Sebastien Bratières, Marine Carpuat, Roldano Cattoni, Mauro Cet-tolo, Lizhong Chen, Marcello Federico, Marco Gaido, Mahendra Gupta, HyoJung Han, Ali Hatami, David Javorský, Yejin Jeon, Marek Kasztelnik, Danni Liu, Nam Luu, Min Ma, Dominik Macháček, Marie Maltais, Evgeny Matusov, Chandresh Kumar Maurya, John P. McCrae, Yasmin Moslem, Satoshi Nakamura, Matteo Negri, Jan Niehues, Atul Kr. Ojha, Siqi Ouyang, Sara Papi, Peter Polák, Fabian Retkowski, Beatrice Savoldi, Claytone Sikasote, Matthias Sperber, Sebastian Stüker, Katsuhito Sudoh, Marco Turchi, Alex Waibel, Patrick Wilken, Vilém Zouhar, and Maike Züfle. Speech transla-tion and metrics in 2026: Findings of the iwslt campaign. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT 2026) , San Diego, California, US, 2026. Association for Computational Linguistics. 1 [2] Kshitij Ambilduke, Ben Peters, Sonal Sannigrahi, Anil Keshwani, Tsz Kin Lam, Bruno Martins, Marcely Zanon Boito, and André FT Martins. From tower to spire: Adding the speech modality to a text-only llm. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10620 , 2025. 1 [3] Loïc Barrault, Yu-An Chung, Mariano Cora Meglioli, David Dale, Ning Dong, Paul-Ambroise Duquenne, Hady Elsahar, Hongyu Gong, Kevin Heffernan, John Hoff-man, et al. Seamlessm4t: Massively multilingual & multimodal machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11596 , 2023. 2 [4] Alexandre Défossez, Laurent Mazaré, Manu Orsini, Amélie Royer, Patrick Pérez, Hervé Jégou, Edouard Grave, and Neil Zeghidour. Moshi: a speech-text foun-dation model for real-time dialogue. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00037 , 2024. 1 [5] Alex Graves, Santiago Fernández, Faustino Gomez, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Connectionist temporal classi-fication: Labelling unsegmented sequence data with recurrent neural networks. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 369–376, 2006. 4 [6] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2022. 2, 5 [7] Shujie Hu, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Sanyuan Chen, Ling-wei Meng, Hongkun Hao, Jing Pan, Xunying Liu, Jinyu Li, Sunit Sivasankaran, et al. Wavllm: Towards ro-

> 7

NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track bust and adaptive speech large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00656 , 2024. 1 [8] Rongjie Huang, Mingze Li, Dongchao Yang, Jiatong Shi, Xuankai Chang, Zhenhui Ye, Yuning Wu, Zhiqing Hong, Jiawei Huang, Jinglin Liu, et al. Audiogpt: Understand-ing and generating speech, music, sound, and talking head. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 23802–23804, 2024. 1 [9] J. Iranzo-Sánchez, J. A. Silvestre-Cerdà, J. Jorge, N. Roselló, A. Giménez, A. Sanchis, J. Civera, and A. Juan. Europarl-st: A multilingual corpus for speech transla-tion of parliamentary debates. In ICASSP 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 8229–8233, 2020. 2 [10] Beomseok Lee, Marcely Zanon Boito, Laurent Besacier, and Ioan Calapodescu. NAVER LABS Europe submis-sion to the instruction-following track. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Spoken Language Translation (IWSLT 2025) , pages 186–200, Vienna, Aus-tria (in-person and online), 2025. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 [11] Pedro Henrique Martins, Patrick Fernandes, João Alves, Nuno M. Guerreiro, Ricardo Rei, Duarte M. Alves, José Pombal, Amin Farajian, Manuel Faysse, Mateusz Kli-maszewski, Pierre Colombo, Barry Haddow, José G. C. de Souza, Alexandra Birch, and André F. T. Martins. Eu-rollm: Multilingual language models for europe, 2024. 5[12] Biswesh Mohapatra, Marcely Zanon Boito, and Ioan Calapodescu. Speechmapper: Speech-to-text embed-ding projector for llms. In ICASSP 2026 - 2026 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 2026. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 [13] Tu Anh Nguyen, Benjamin Muller, Bokai Yu, Marta R Costa-Jussa, Maha Elbayad, Sravya Popuri, Christophe Ropers, Paul-Ambroise Duquenne, Robin Algayres, Rus-lan Mavlyutov, et al. Spirit-lm: Interleaved spoken and written language model. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 13:30–52, 2025. 1 [14] Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and San-jeev Khudanpur. Librispeech: An asr corpus based on public domain audio books. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 5206–5210, 2015. 2 [15] Sara Papi, Maike Züfle, Marco Gaido, Beatrice Savoldi, Danni Liu, Ioannis Douros, Luisa Bentivogli, and Jan Niehues. MCIF: Multimodal crosslingual instruction-following benchmark from scientific talks. In The Four-teenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2026. 2 [16] Vineel Pratap, Andros Tjandra, Bowen Shi, Paden Tomasello, Arun Babu, Sayani Kundu, Ali Elkahky, Zhao-heng Ni, Apoorv Vyas, Maryam Fazel-Zarandi, et al. Scaling speech technology to 1,000+ languages. Jour-nal of Machine Learning Research , 25(97):1–52, 2024. 5[17] David Rau, Hervé Déjean, Nadezhda Chirkova, Thibault Formal, Shuai Wang, Stéphane Clinchant, and Vas-silina Nikoulina. BERGEN: A benchmarking library for retrieval-augmented generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 ,pages 7640–7663, Miami, Florida, USA, 2024. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. 5 [18] Ricardo Rei, José G. C. de Souza, Duarte Alves, Chrysoula Zerva, Ana C Farinha, Taisiya Glushkova, Alon Lavie, Luisa Coheur, and André F. T. Martins. COMET-22: Unbabel-IST 2022 submission for the met-rics shared task. In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Machine Translation (WMT) , pages 578–585, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid), 2022. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. 2, 5 [19] Paul K Rubenstein, Chulayuth Asawaroengchai, Duc Dung Nguyen, Ankur Bapna, Zalán Borsos, Félix de Chaumont Quitry, Peter Chen, Dalia El Badawy, Wei Han, Eugene Kharitonov, et al. Audiopalm: Alarge language model that can speak and listen. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12925 , 2023. 1 [20] Elizabeth Salesky, Kareem Darwish, Mohamed Al-Badrashiny, Mona Diab, and Jan Niehues. Evaluating multilingual speech translation under realistic condi-tions with resegmentation and terminology. In Proceed-ings of the 20th International Conference on Spoken Lan-guage Translation (IWSLT 2023) , pages 62–78, Toronto, Canada (in-person and online), 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. 10 [21] Changli Tang, Wenyi Yu, Guangzhi Sun, Xianzhao Chen, Tian Tan, Wei Li, Lu Lu, Zejun Ma, and Chao Zhang. Salmonn: Towards generic hearing abilities for large lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13289 , 2023. 1[22] Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Per-rin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, Louis Rouillard, Thomas Mesnard, Geoffrey Cideron, Jean bastien Grill, Sabela Ramos, Edouard Yvinec, Michelle Casbon, Etienne Pot, Ivo Penchev, Gaël Liu, Francesco Visin, Kathleen Kenealy, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohai Zhai, Anton Tsitsulin, Robert Busa-Fekete, Alex Feng, Noveen Sachdeva, Benjamin Cole-man, Yi Gao, Basil Mustafa, Iain Barr, Emilio Parisotto, David Tian, Matan Eyal, Colin Cherry, Jan-Thorsten Pe-ter, Danila Sinopalnikov, Surya Bhupatiraju, Rishabh Agarwal, Mehran Kazemi, Dan Malkin, Ravin Kumar, David Vilar, Idan Brusilovsky, Jiaming Luo, Andreas Steiner, Abe Friesen, Abhanshu Sharma, Abheesht Sharma, Adi Mayrav Gilady, Adrian Goedeckemeyer, Alaa Saade, Alex Feng, Alexander Kolesnikov, Alexei Bendebury, Alvin Abdagic, Amit Vadi, András György, André Susano Pinto, Anil Das, Ankur Bapna, Antoine Miech, Antoine Yang, Antonia Paterson, Ashish Shenoy, Ayan Chakrabarti, Bilal Piot, Bo Wu, Bobak Shahriari, Bryce Petrini, Charlie Chen, Charline Le Lan, Christo-pher A. Choquette-Choo, CJ Carey, Cormac Brick, Daniel Deutsch, Danielle Eisenbud, Dee Cattle, Derek Cheng, Dimitris Paparas, Divyashree Shivakumar Sreepathihalli, Doug Reid, Dustin Tran, Dustin Zelle, Eric Noland, Er-

> 8

NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track win Huizenga, Eugene Kharitonov, Frederick Liu, Gagik Amirkhanyan, Glenn Cameron, Hadi Hashemi, Hanna Klimczak-Plucińska, Harman Singh, Harsh Mehta, Har-shal Tushar Lehri, Hussein Hazimeh, Ian Ballantyne, Idan Szpektor, Ivan Nardini, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Jetha Chan, Joe Stanton, John Wieting, Jonathan Lai, Jordi Orbay, Joseph Fernandez, Josh Newlan, Ju yeong Ji, Jyotinder Singh, Kat Black, Kathy Yu, Kevin Hui, Ki-ran Vodrahalli, Klaus Greff, Linhai Qiu, Marcella Valen-tine, Marina Coelho, Marvin Ritter, Matt Hoffman, Matthew Watson, Mayank Chaturvedi, Michael Moyni-han, Min Ma, Nabila Babar, Natasha Noy, Nathan Byrd, Nick Roy, Nikola Momchev, Nilay Chauhan, Noveen Sachdeva, Oskar Bunyan, Pankil Botarda, Paul Caron, Paul Kishan Rubenstein, Phil Culliton, Philipp Schmid, Pier Giuseppe Sessa, Pingmei Xu, Piotr Stanczyk, Pouya Tafti, Rakesh Shivanna, Renjie Wu, Renke Pan, Reza Rokni, Rob Willoughby, Rohith Vallu, Ryan Mullins, Sammy Jerome, Sara Smoot, Sertan Girgin, Shariq Iqbal, Shashir Reddy, Shruti Sheth, Siim Põder, Sijal Bhatnagar, Sindhu Raghuram Panyam, Sivan Eiger, Su-san Zhang, Tianqi Liu, Trevor Yacovone, Tyler Liechty, Uday Kalra, Utku Evci, Vedant Misra, Vincent Roseberry, Vlad Feinberg, Vlad Kolesnikov, Woohyun Han, Woosuk Kwon, Xi Chen, Yinlam Chow, Yuvein Zhu, Zichuan Wei, Zoltan Egyed, Victor Cotruta, Minh Giang, Phoebe Kirk, Anand Rao, Kat Black, Nabila Babar, Jessica Lo, Erica Moreira, Luiz Gustavo Martins, Omar Sanseviero, Lucas Gonzalez, Zach Gleicher, Tris Warkentin, Vahab Mirrokni, Evan Senter, Eli Collins, Joelle Barral, Zoubin Ghahramani, Raia Hadsell, Yossi Matias, D. Sculley, Slav Petrov, Noah Fiedel, Noam Shazeer, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Clement Farabet, Elena Buchatskaya, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Ro-han Anil, Dmitry, Lepikhin, Sebastian Borgeaud, Olivier Bachem, Armand Joulin, Alek Andreev, Cassidy Hardin, Robert Dadashi, and Léonard Hussenot. Gemma 3 tech-nical report, 2025. 5 [23] Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. 2 [24] torchtune maintainers and contributors. torchtune: Py-torch’s finetuning library, 2024. 5 [25] Changhan Wang, Anne Wu, and Juan Pino. Covost 2: A massively multilingual speech-to-text translation corpus, 2020. 2 [26] Jin Xu, Zhifang Guo, Hangrui Hu, Yunfei Chu, Xiong Wang, Jinzheng He, Yuxuan Wang, Xian Shi, Ting He, Xinfa Zhu, et al. Qwen3-omni technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.17765 , 2025. 1 [27] Rong Ye, Chengqi Zhao, Tom Ko, Chutong Meng, Tao Wang, Mingxuan Wang, and Jun Cao. GigaST: A 10,000-hour Pseudo Speech Translation Corpus. In Interspeech 2023 , pages 2168–2172, 2023. 2 [28] Zihan Zhao, Yiyang Jiang, Heyang Liu, Yu Wang, and Yanfeng Wang. Librisqa: A novel dataset and framework for spoken question answering with large language mod-els. IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence , 6(11): 2884–2895, 2025. 2 

> 9NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track

## A. Appendix 

A.1. Qwen-based SQA Invalid Split 

We aim to generate high-quality invalid questions for training our speech LLM. To ensure this quality, the generated questions must be unrelated to the speech content. Since LibriSQA is an audiobook-based dataset, we therefore focus on creating questions grounded in broad conversational topics. We first prompted Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 to pro-duce a large set of conversation topics using: “List about 1000 conversation topics, without numbering or adding any comment of explana-tion. ”After post-processing the output, we retained 413 topics. Next, for each one, we prompted the LLM with: “Generate 30 words related to TOPIC . Produce a comma-separated list of words, without any explanation. ”Then, using the resulting list, we finally prompted the model with: “Ask 25 different questions about WORD . Do not repeat the question, include no comments, and output only the questions, one per line. ”The output was automatically filtered to remove sen-tences that did not end with a question mark, resulting in 62,040 English questions. Some examples are shown below: 

• What role do animals play in traditional rites? 

• How does still air interact with thermal radiation? 

• Can a revoked loan be reapproved? 

• What is the role of the saw blade in determining cut quality? 

• How do social media platforms influence the percep-tion of friendship and connection? 

• What is the significance of putrefaction in forensic science? 

A.2. fakACL Creation 

Our goal in creating fakACL is to mimic ACL60-60 [ 20 ]and MCIF. These datasets consist of oral presentations that typically begin with the authors introducing them-selves and stating the title of the paper, followed by an overview of the main findings. Our dataset creation process consists of three stages: (1) script creation, (2) segmentation and speech synthesis, and (3) QA generation. We now describe these stages. 

A.2.1 Script Creation 

The goal of this stage of the dataset creation process is to generate high-quality presentation scripts on NLP-related topics. We started the process by first prompting 

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 to: “List 60 sub-fields related to ACL/NLP confer-ences, one subfield par line. ”This resulted in a list of 56 ACL conference topics, with entries such as Healthcare NLP , Legal document anal-ysis and Education . We do not check for duplicated conference topics. Next, we generated a collection of possible paper titles for each one of the topics. We prompted the LLM with: “List 40 paper titles from ACL conferences re-lated to: SUB-FIELD . Output only the paper titles, one per line. Nothing else. ”The result was a collection of 2,527 paper titles. Ex-amples of generated paper titles were “ Phonological and Morphological Development in Multilingual Children ”and “ Emotion-Driven Text-to-Speech with Multimodal In-puts ”. Finally, we prompted the LLM with: “Write a 12 sentences oral script for presenting the ACL paper entitled: TITLE .”After manual processing, this resulted in 2,497 scripts. An example of a generated script is given at Table 3. 

A.2.2 Segmentation and Speech Synthesis 

After the scripts are created, the next step consists of segmenting the content into blocks to be synthesized by 

SeamlessM4T-v2-large . This stage includes prepro-cessing steps such as number and symbol normalization (e.g., “30%” becomes “thirty percent”), as well as text normalization. We use the Python library spaCy to split the scripts into sentences, normalize the text, and discard sen-tences containing fewer than 10 characters or fewer than 6 words. This process results in 21,400 sen-tences. We then synthesize the sentences using 

SeamlessM4T-v2-large TTS with random speakers. The average utterance length is 8.6 seconds. 

A.2.3 QA Generation 

Lastly, after obtaining the segmented and normal-ized scripts, our next goal was to generate valid ques-tion–answer pairs. For this stage, we discarded the first three and the last two sentences of each script, as these 

> 10

NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track 

Synthetic Script from fakACL 

Good morning, everyone. Today, I’m excited to present our paper titled Cross-Modal Retrieval using Cross-Modal Semantic Matching and Contextual Awareness. In traditional retrieval systems, matching content across different modalities like text and images has been challenging due to inherent semantic gaps. Our approach tackles this by introducing a novel framework that combines cross-modal semantic matching with contextual awareness. We leverage deep neural networks to learn rich, shared semantic representations between modalities, ensuring that queries from one modality can accurately retrieve relevant content from another. Crucially, we incorporate contextual awareness to understand the environment and user intent such as time, location, or user preferences before generating retrieval results. This allows the system to go beyond literal matches and deliver more relevant, human-like responses. We validate our method on benchmark datasets including CORD-19 and MS-COCO, demonstrating significant improvements over baseline models in precision and recall. Our experiments show that contextual signals improve retrieval performance by up to 18% in real-world scenarios. Additionally, we conduct ablation studies that confirm the importance of both semantic matching and contextual components. The framework is scalable and can be adapted to various applications from medical image search to e-commerce product recommendations. We believe this work bridges the gap between technical accuracy and real-world usability in cross-modal systems. Finally, we envision future work exploring dynamic context modeling and multimodal feedback loops to further refine retrieval. Thank you for your attention. I’d be happy to take any questions. 

Synthetic Questions and Answers from fakACL 

Context from script: “Crucially, we incorporate contextual awareness to understand the environment and user intent such as time, location, or user preferences before generating retrieval results.” 

Question 1: “What does the system use to understand user intent?” 

Answer 1: “Contextual awareness including time, location, and user preferences.” 

Question 2: “How does the system enhance retrieval results?” 

Answer 2: “By aligning retrieval with time, location, and user preferences.” 

Table 3: Example of a synthetic presentation script and QA produced by Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 .tended to be overly generic and usually corresponded to greetings or acknowledgments. For each text segment, we prompted 

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 with: “Generate 2 pairs of question and very short answer. Generate the question in one line, the answer in the next line, prefix the question by “Q:” and the answer by “A:”. Generate strictly and solely based on the content: CONTENT .”We automatically filtered the outputs based on the ques-tion–answer prefixes and subsequently performed man-ual verification to remove clear hallucinations. This process yielded a final set of 38,968 questions. 

A.3. IWLST 2026 IF Short Results 

Table 4 presents the official results for our primary (Setup 1 from Table 1) and contrastive (BEST-IWSLT25-IF) submissions. Overall, the results confirm that we were able to build a stronger system than last year’s submission, despite relying on a smaller and weaker LLM backbone. Our primary submission outperforms BEST-IWSLT25-IF across all languages for ST, while lagging by only 0.2% WER on ASR. For QA, this year’s model again improves performance across all languages except Italian, for which we found the backbone to be particularly weak. Finally, the inclusion of MCQ training allowed our model to perform the surprise task of Quality Estima-tion (QE-accuracy) while respecting the proposed zero-shot prompt (QE-format-accuracy). In contrast, last year’s solution struggled to follow the required format and often generated answers instead of selecting op-tions, making it incapable of correctly answering cases where the correct option did not correspond to the lan-guage of the prompt. 

> 11

NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track                                                       

> Model Lang TRANS-COMET QA-BERTScore QE-accuracy QE-format-accuracy ASR-WER
> NLE_IWSLT26_IF_SHORT_CONSTRAINED_PRIMARY en –0.531 ––0.136 NLE_IWSLT26_IF_SHORT_CONSTRAINED_PRIMARY it 0.763 0.456 –––NLE_IWSLT26_IF_SHORT_CONSTRAINED_PRIMARY de 0.765 0.470 0.786 0.997 –NLE_IWSLT26_IF_SHORT_CONSTRAINED_PRIMARY zh 0.794 0.487 0.894 1.000 –NLE_IWSLT26_IF_SHORT_UNCONSTRAINED_CONSTRASTIVE en –0.501 ––0.134
> NLE_IWSLT26_IF_SHORT_UNCONSTRAINED_CONSTRASTIVE it 0.733 0.514 –––NLE_IWSLT26_IF_SHORT_UNCONSTRAINED_CONSTRASTIVE de 0.749 0.462 0.333 0.005 –NLE_IWSLT26_IF_SHORT_UNCONSTRAINED_CONSTRASTIVE zh 0.755 0.466 0.500 0.014 –

Table 4: Official results for our systems submitted to IWSLT 2026 IF short track. 

Dataset Task Language # Samples CoVoST2 ASR en 289,413 

ST/MT en-de 289,413 en-zh 289,413 

EuroParlST ASR en 35,372 

ST/MT en-de 32,628 en-it 29,552 

GigaST ASR en 7,645,641 

ST/MT 

en-de 7,645,641 en-it* 3,004,804 en-zh 7,645,641 

LibriSQA ASR en 104,014 

MT 

en-de* 36,707 en-it* 75,378 en-zh* 22,211 

SQA/QA (valid) 

en 208,038 en-de* 59,274 en-it* 127,295 en-zh* 29,385 

SQA/QA (invalid) 

en 169,068 en-de* 79,578 en-it* 123,632 en-zh* 58,092 

fakACL ASR en † 21,400 

ST/MT 

en †-de* 9,722 en †-it* 14,999 en †-zh* 4,659 

SQA/QA (valid) 

en † 38,968 en †-de* 8,763 en †-it* 22,290 en †-zh* 5,341 

SQA/QA (invalid) 

en † 38,968 en †-de* 21,192 en †-it* 31,333 en †-zh* 19,549 Table 5: Training sets statistics by task. For ST/MT sets, target side is duplicated. * denotes synthetic text ob-tained via SeamlessM4T-v2-large MT; † indicates splits generated with SeamlessM4T-v2-large TTS. For fakACL, all English textual content is produced via 

Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 prompting. 

12 NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track                                                                        

> CoVoST EuroParlST GigaST LibriSQA fakeACL ASR ST MT ASR ST MT ASR ST MT ASR MT SQA/QA ASR ST MT SQA/QA ASpeechMapper (ASR) ✓✗✗✓✗✗✓✗✗✓✗✗✗✗✗✗
> BText-only LoRA (MT/QA) ✗✗✓✗✗✓✗✗✓✗✓✓✗✗✓✓
> CMultimodal model (ASR/ST/MT/SQA/QA) ✓✓✓✓✓✓✗✗✓✗✓✓✗✗✓✓

Table 6: List of datasets and splits used for training our presented models. Statistics are presented in Table 5. 

User Prompt Speech Prefix Content: <speech>[ SPEECH EMBEDDINGS ]</speech>\n 

Text Prefix Content: <text>[ SPEECH TRANSCRIPTION ]</text>\n 

ASR Question: Can you transcribe the Speech content into English text?\n 

ST/MT (de) Question: Können Sie den Inhalt der Rede in den deutschen Text übersetzen?\n 

ST/MT (it) Question: Puoi tradurre il contenuto del discorso in testo italiano?\n 

ST/MT (zh) Question: 你能把演讲内容翻译成中文吗?\n 

SQA/QA (Free format) Question: [ QUESTION ]\n 

SQA/QA (MCQ) Question: [ QUESTION+OPTIONS ]\n 

Surprise Task Question: [ SURPRISE INSTRUCTION ]\n 

Suffix \nYour answer: 

Suffix (zero-shot ASR) Do not add anything else to your answer. \nYour answer: 

Suffix (zero-shot ST de) Antworten Sie nur mit der Übersetzung. Fügen Sie Ihrer Antwort nichts weiter hinzu.\nYour answer: 

Suffix (zero-shot ST it) Rispondi solo con la traduzione. Non aggiungere altro alla tua risposta.\nYour answer: 

Suffix (zero-shot ST zh) 仅回复翻译。请勿在答案中添加任何其他内容。\nYour answer: Table 7: The user turn prompt template used for training and/or evaluating models. For speech tasks, the user prompt is given by Speech Prefix+Task+Suffix , for textual tasks, the user prompt is given by Text Pre-fix+Task+Suffix . ST/MT instructions were obtained by translating the instruction “ Can you translate the Speech content into [German/Italian/Chinese] text? ” and “ Answer only with the translation. Do not add anything else to your answer. ” to corresponding target languages using SeamlessM4T-v2-large . SQA/QA instructions are either free format (direct answer) or multiple-choice questions (MCQ). In the case of MCQ, options are included in the same line of the question, and both are translated to the target language in case of multilingual SQA. Surprise task instructions are included after replacing the “\n” by spaces. 

> 13 NAVER LABS Europe Submission to the Instruction-following 2026 Short Track

Reference Generation 

This is a joint work with John Gauthier, Aaron Mueller, Kanishka Misra, Karen Fences, Roger Levy, and Adina Williams. It’s a joint work with John Gautier, Aaron Mueller, Kanishka Misra, Karen Fentos, Roger Le, and Andina Will. Will. Will. Mr President, what worries me most is the suggestion that the European Investment Bank has a significant role to play in solving the financial crisis – that it can somehow act as the Europe-wide body to provide stim-ulus where Member States have singularly failed to coordinate their own stimuli. Mr. President, what worries me most is the suggestion that the European Investment Bank has a significant role to play in solving the financial crisis. It is claimed that the bank could somehow act as the Europe-wide body to provide stimulus where member states have singularly failed to coordinate their own stimuli. From the experience I have as a member of the national parliament and talking with many people for a long time, I would really be in favour of smart sanctions – targeted, for example, at specific members of the Revolutionary Guard, putting them on a veto list for visits, or at other specific persons. From the experience I have as a member of the na-tional parliament and having discussed this with many people over a long time, I would really support smart sanctions targeting, for example, specific members of the Revolutionary Guard, in order to target or punish specific individuals. C. Valor and fortune The speech states: *“each party hurrying to a battle where value and and fortune chiefly the the success.”* \n\nThis indicates that the primary factors determin-ing battle success were **valor** (bravery) and **for-tune** (luck).\n\nLooking at the options:\n\n- A. Ex-perience and knowledge → not mentioned \n- B. Strate-gic planning → not mentioned \n- C. Valor and fortune 

→ directly supported by the speech \n- D. Ignorance and impetuous conduct → mentioned as something his-torians may have overlooked, not as a factor of success \n\n**Correct answer: C. Valor and fortune** 

Table 8: Some examples of generations for Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 using SpeechMapper (A) embeddings. In the top, an example of hallucination related to unknown named entities at MCIF; in the middle two examples of ASR rephrasing with EuroParlST; and in the bottom an example of extremely verbose SQA output for LibriSQA.