Title: Communicating Sound Through Natural Language

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.08750v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 00:41:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Communicating Sound Through Natural Language 

Emanuele Rossi 

Sapienza University of Rome 

Emanuele Rodolà 

Sapienza University of Rome / Paradigma 

# Abstract 

Natural language is widely used to describe, prompt, and control audio systems, but rarely serves as the representation carrying audio itself. We introduce lexical acoustic coding (LAC), a framework in which pre-trained LLM sender and receiver agents transmit sound through natural language. Under fixed system prompts, the agents write their own analysis and synthesis code, communicating only through a lexical sentence, shared vocabulary, and optional symbolic music structure. The sender analyzes an input waveform into interpretable, non-learned acoustic de-scriptors, quantizes each with a feature-specific interval vocabulary, and verbalizes the lexical code as English. The receiver parses the sentence back into lexical-acoustic constraints and renders a waveform through closed-loop refinement. The transmitted text serves as both a rich caption and as the transport representation itself . We frame LAC as a finite-rate lossy quantizer, exposing trade-offs between vocabulary size, rate, and fidelity. Experiments on short sounds and symbolic music transfer show that plain text preserves measurable acoustic structure while remaining interpretable, editable, and native to LLM-mediated communication. 

# 1 Introduction 

Natural language is usually peripheral to audio systems. It appears as metadata, supervision, prompts, or captions, while the audio itself is transported as waveforms, continuous latents, or learned codec tokens [Zeghidour et al., 2022, Défossez et al., 2023, Borsos et al., 2023, Agostinelli et al., 2023]. In this work, we study a different design point: a sound is projected onto an interpretable acoustic feature space, discretized into a fixed lexical code, and rendered as ordinary English prose. The sentence thus becomes the transport representation of the sound it describes 1.The motivating question of this paper is whether a sufficiently structured vocabulary can carry enough acoustic information to support a usable round trip between language-model agents. Our starting point is that descriptor-based audio analysis already provides a compact, interpretable vocabulary for many perceptually salient aspects of sound, including spectral shape, temporal envelope, and harmonic structure [Lartillot and Toiviainen, 2007, McFee et al., 2015, Caetano et al., 2019]. At the same time, work on timbre semantics and audio production shows that humans routinely describe sound through stable verbal descriptors, and such language can support actionable control [Saitis and Weinzierl, 2019, Cartwright and Pardo, 2013, Roche et al., 2021, Venkatesh et al., 2022, Kumar et al., 2025]. Recent speech and audio language models move in a related direction by learning text-aligned or semantically factorized audio tokenizations [Tseng et al., 2026, Wang et al., 2025, Dang et al., 2026, Yang et al., 2026, Yu et al., 2024]. We ask a different question: 

Can language be structured so that it carries measurable acoustic information?      

> 1See demo page: https://erodola.github.io/lac-demo/
> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.08750v1 [cs.LG] 9 May 2026 punchy warm strong clang faint air ...
> punchy warm strong clang faint air ...

Sender agent · analysis Receiver agent · synthesis  

> moderate onset clipped warm spread ... front-loaded clipped moderate onset ...
> Transmitted sentence
> Waveform
> Input sound
> Features
> d-dim vector
> Lexical code
> dlabels
> Lexical code
> Parsed labels
> Targets
> Interval constraints
> Waveform
> Rendered sound
> closed-loop refinement
> "The sound hits with mid-power punch and low-oscillation, using a measured, moderate-onset envelope that stays front-loaded and clipped. Its spectrum is warm and spread, with..."

Figure 1: LAC pipeline. A waveform is analyzed into a short descriptor, quantized into a lexical code, and verbalized as an English sentence; the sentence then crosses the channel. The receiver parses it back into labels, inverts each label to an interval target, and renders a waveform via a decoder with closed-loop refinement. Not a single binary data byte is ever transmitted end-to-end; complete examples of sounds and transmitted sentences are available in the demo page. The setting we consider is fully agentic, and has a one-time setup phase and a per-sound transmission phase. A sender and a receiver LLM operate under fixed system prompts, but each writes its own code for analysis and synthesis. Sender and receiver are off-the-shelf and not trained for this task. In the setup phase, sender and receiver are given the same vocabulary; this vocabulary can be human-authored and shared once, or generated by the source agent and transmitted once before any sounds are sent. In the per-sound phase, the sender analyzes an input sound, maps it to a d-dimensional lexical code (with small d) using the shared vocabulary, verbalizes that code as an English sentence, and sends only that sentence. The receiver maps the sentence back to the same d-label code and renders an approximate waveform from the decoded acoustic constraints; see Figure 1. No binary audio payload, learned latent, or non-ASCII side channel is transmitted during either phase. The payload is a human-readable sentence; its reversibility comes from the shared vocabulary and from the constraint that the sentence preserves each lexical term unambiguously. 

Scope and objective. Once a sound is projected into lexical acoustic coordinates, the goal is no longer exact sample recovery. Instead, the decoder operates generatively: it produces a waveform consistent with the transmitted lexical description, which can be modified and updated to generate new sounds if desired. In this sense, LAC is closer to a semantic communication system than to a conventional codec [Jiang et al., 2024]. The representation deliberately trades bit-level invertibility for properties that ordinary codecs do not jointly prioritize: human readability, acoustic interpretability, text-native transport, and compatibility with agentic code generation at both ends of the channel. This places LAC between captioning and compression. Captions are readable but too weak for reconstruction; codecs are invertible but opaque. Our aim is a third object: a human-readable acoustic code whose sentence form remains informative about how the sound should sound , while still enabling reconstruction through an explicit inverse mapping. We theoretically view LAC as a finite-rate lossy quantizer, exposing the trade-off between vocabulary size, rate, and reconstruction fidelity. As an application, we consider music transfer where structure is transmitted separately (e.g. in ABC notation or free-form language) while timbre is carried by LAC. 

Contribution. This paper makes three contributions. • We formalize lexical acoustic coding (LAC): a framework quantizing acoustic descriptors into a short lexical code, verbalized for plain-text English transmission between LLM agents, and we give basic finite-rate and lossy-quantizer results for the resulting channel. • We introduce an agentic setting where sender and receiver write their own analysis and synthesis code under fixed prompts, while communicating only through the lexical sentence, vocabulary, and optional symbolic music structure. 2• We introduce hybrid reconstruction with interval-aware closed-loop refinement, and show that LAC supports both short isolated sounds and symbolic music transfer, where song structure is preserved externally and timbre passes through the lexical channel. The system occupies a distinct point in the design space of audio representations: not a replacement for neural codecs on raw rate–distortion grounds, but an interpretable, inspectable, plain-text acoustic representation that humans can read and preserve, language models can manipulate, and decoders can render into sound. 

# 2 Related Work 

Descriptor-based and perceptual audio representations. Our method builds on a long tradition of interpretable audio analysis using handcrafted descriptors. In speech and MIR, spectral statistics, envelope features, harmonicity measures, and cepstral summaries have long provided compact proxies for waveform structure [Davis and Mermelstein, 1980, Lartillot and Toiviainen, 2007, McFee et al., 2015]. These representations remain useful when editability, interpretability, and direct links to known acoustical quantities are preferred over end-to-end latent variables. In parallel, perceptual studies examine how listeners describe sound with adjectives and metaphors, and how such language relates to measurable acoustic structure [Saitis and Weinzierl, 2019, Cartwright and Pardo, 2013, Roche et al., 2021]. Recent work has also explored mapping text to concrete audio parameters [Venkatesh et al., 2022], including equalization and related sound attributes [Kumar et al., 2025]. Our work is grounded in both traditions: it starts from standard acoustic descriptors, but then lexicalizes them into prose that is intended to remain meaningful to a human or artificial agent. 

Language as control vs language as transport. Several prior systems use language to control 

sound, rather than to carry sound. SocialEQ crowdsourced actionable equalization (EQ) descriptors from users, explicitly seeking mappings between terms such as “warm” and EQ operations [Cartwright and Pardo, 2013]. Subsequent work used word embeddings to predict EQ settings from semantic descriptors, including descriptors not seen during training [Venkatesh et al., 2022]. In sound synthesis, perceptually grounded latent spaces have been designed to support verbal control over timbral attributes such as metallic, warm, breathy, or percussive [Roche et al., 2021]. More recently, SILA augments text-to-audio generation with explicit control over acoustic characteristics such as loudness, pitch, reverb, brightness, noise, and duration [Kumar et al., 2025]. These approaches establish that natural language can be an effective interface for audio manipulation and generation. Our setting is different in that the sentence is neither a prompt, a pure caption, or user control signal. Rather, the sentence is the transmitted representation itself: a lossy, human-readable code from which a receiver reconstructs a quantized acoustic feature vector and then audio. 

Learned audio codecs and audio-language tokenization. A different line of work learns compact representations for audio. Neural codecs such as SoundStream [Zeghidour et al., 2022] and EnCodec [Défossez et al., 2023] compress waveforms into learned discrete codes optimized jointly with neural decoders. Language-audio generative models such as AudioLM [Borsos et al., 2023] and MusicLM [Agostinelli et al., 2023] then model sequences of such learned audio tokens to enable long-range generation and text conditioning. Recent speech-language models have pushed this further toward text-aligned or semantically factorized tokenizations. TASTE [Tseng et al., 2026] learns a text-aligned speech tokenizer through attention-based aggregation and a reconstruction objective; TaDiCodec [Wang et al., 2025] uses a text-aware diffusion codec to achieve low-rate speech tokenization; TADA [Dang et al., 2026] proposes one-to-one synchronization between text tokens and acoustic features; UniAudio 2.0 [Yang et al., 2026] factorizes audio into reasoning and reconstruction tokens; and SALMONN-omni [Yu et al., 2024] removes explicit codec injection in a full-duplex speech LLM. These works are conceptually related because they seek compact language–audio representations. However, they rely on learned latents, internal tokenizers, or end-to-end neural decoders. In contrast, LAC uses an explicit lexical code over classical acoustic descriptors, transmitted in ordinary English and inverted through deterministic analysis/synthesis. 

Symbolic structure and explicit analysis/synthesis pipelines. Our formulation is also related to work that separates symbolic musical structure or control information from waveform rendering. 3Method                             

> Human readability
> LLM-native transport
> Semantic editing
> Acoustic interpretability
> Training-free
> Generative decoding
> Bandwidth efficiency
> Bit-wise reconstruction
> Lossless codec (FLAC, WAV) ######
> Handcrafted descriptors (MFCC, spectral centroid) #####
> Neural codec (EnCodec, SoundStream) #G#####
> Audio-language tokenizers (AudioLM, TASTE) #G#G####
> Unconstrained text caption G###
> LAC (this paper) G##

Table 1: Comparison of audio representation methods. = yes; G# = partial; # = no. Axis definitions and per-method justifications in Appendix A. JAMS [Humphrey et al., 2014], for example, provides structured, machine-readable annotations for music and audio research, while factorized music and audio pipelines separate event structure, control trajectories, and synthesis, including DDSP-style differentiable control [Engel et al., 2020, Wu et al., 2022] and MIDI-conditioned performance modeling [Hawthorne et al., 2019]. These lines of work support the broader idea that audio need not be represented only as waveform samples, but can also be mediated by an intermediate representation. In our setting, that intermediate representation is natural language. More specifically, the proposed framework can transmit both an acoustic description of the sound and, when available, an explicit symbolic representation of the music, such as MIDI-like structure. The key difference is therefore not the use of an intermediate representation as such, but the use of natural language as the transport layer for acoustic content. 

Natural language as a communication channel. More broadly, our work connects to the emerging literature on semantic communication with foundation models, which studies how shared priors and world knowledge can shift communication away from raw bits toward higher-level representations [Jiang et al., 2024]. It is also adjacent to recent work on linguistic steganography and covert channels, where natural language is used to carry arbitrary payloads robustly under paraphrasing or distributional constraints [Gaure et al., 2025, Perry et al., 2025, Norelli and Bronstein, 2026]. Yet our goal is fundamentally different from covert transmission. We do not seek to hide arbitrary bits in fluent cover text. Instead, we seek an overt , human-readable, perceptually grounded channel in which the transmitted sentence remains informative about how the sound actually sounds .

Our positioning. We sit at the intersection of descriptor-based timbre analysis, language-based sound control, and learned audio tokenization, but differ from each (see Table 1). We lexicalize standard acoustic descriptors into a constrained natural-language code, use prose as the represen-tation itself rather than merely a control interface, and replace learned latent tokens with a human-interpretable ASCII transport layer. To our knowledge, prior work has not combined these properties in a single representation that is descriptor-grounded, intelligible to experts, and invertible for lossy waveform reconstruction through LLM-mediated sender/receiver pipelines. 

# 3 Method 

Our method follows a communication protocol with shared vocabulary: each input sound is analyzed and mapped into the vocabulary, verbalized as a sentence, transmitted to a decoder, mapped back to numerical values, and re-synthesized as an audio waveform. Encoder and decoder are pre-trained language models, and the transmission happens through a pure text channel. 

3.1 Shared vocabulary 

The first step in the transmission is the analysis of the input sound into numerical features. The feature choice is done once at the beginning, and encoded into a feature set F; for example: 4F = { rms_energy , decay_time , spectral_centroid , . . . } .

Let d = |F| be the number of features. For each feature fi, we define Ai to be its corresponding lexical alphabet; the full lexical state space is then: 

L := A1 × · · · × A d . (1) Each individual alphabet Ai has a different size depending on the feature, and is fixed a priori. For example, the rms_energy feature has the following alphabet of size 5: 

Arms_energy = { whisper , hushed , mid-power , forceful , thunderous } .

The alphabets Ai admit freedom in the lexical choices, and might be human-written or generated once by the sender agent. In this paper, we use an agent-generated lexicon. Feature set F and lexical state space L are shared at the beginning, as part of a vocabulary 

V = {fi, Ai, E i, R i, I i}di=1 , (2) where Ei : R → A i maps a feature value to a lexical label (Section 3.2), while Ri : Ai → R and 

Ii : Ai → R2 map the label back to the feature’s interval midpoint and bounds (Section 3.4). 

Remark. The full vocabulary V is transmitted as pure text , including the chosen feature set, the lexical mapping, and agent instructions on how to implement each feature. See Appendix C and D for the specific information that we used in our prompts. Once the vocabulary is shared, the encode–transmit–decode pipeline follows. 

3.2 Encoder 

The encoder first converts the waveform into a fixed vector of acoustic features, and then lexicalizes each coordinate independently. We start by defining the acoustic feature extractor. 

Acoustic features. Given a mono waveform s ∈ RT , the encoder computes a feature vector 

x = F (s) ∈ Rd , (3) where each coordinate corresponds to a different feature fi, i = 1 , . . . , d .The feature extractor F (s) uses off-the-shelf components and common audio toolkits such as librosa 

[McFee et al., 2015] to keep the system end-to-end, training-free, and reproducible. This way, every coordinate has an acoustically meaningful interpretation that can be named and transmitted. We compute d = 47 features, organized as 7 temporal, 7 spectral, 7 harmonic, and 26 psychoacoustic ones. Appendix B reports their short description. 

Lexical code. Each coordinate is lexicalized independently: 

ℓ = ( ℓ1, . . . , ℓ d), ℓi = Ei(xi). (4) The map Ei : R → A i is implemented as a feature-specific interval table. For example, an RMS value in [0 .10 , 0.30) maps to mid-power . The full feature set and vocabulary mapping are reported in Appendices B and D. We treat these choices as specific instantiations of the LAC framework rather than core contributions: they were generated by an agent on a best-effort basis and are not optimized; we leave the search for better feature subsets and mappings to future work. 

3.3 Sentence transport 

The ordered code ℓ is not sent as a comma-separated list. It is converted into an English sentence 

q = V (ℓ) (5) that contains all d lexical terms in recoverable form. The verbalizer V may add ordinary grammatical material, but it may not delete, merge, paraphrase, or ambiguously rename any term. This is what distinguishes the transmitted sentence from a loose prose caption: it is readable English, but it remains an injective carrier for the acoustic code. The inverse map is a parser U such that, for all ℓ ∈ L :

U (V (ℓ)) = ℓ . (6) 5Example. Consider a short sequence ℓ with d = 3 :

ℓ = ( thunderous , swift-onset , short-decay ) .

This can be written in a sentence q:"A thunderous sound with a swift onset and a short decay ." Since the sentence is written by the sender LLM, it might differ at each run in terms of prose. The receiver applies the inverse parser 

ℓ = U (q) ∈ L (7) to recover the d-slot lexical code before synthesis. Thus the per-sound payload is the sentence q,while the recoverable object carried by that sentence is the full lexical code ℓ.

Remark (finite-rate bottleneck). While the sentence q may be verbose, its recoverable acoustic content cannot be hidden in the prose itself, and the reconstruction quality is instead limited by the information carried by lexical state ℓ.We quantify this bound via Bmax , the worst-case budget (in bits) needed to represent a lexical state: 

Bmax := log 2 |L| =

> d

X

> i=1

log 2 |A i|. (8) Formally, let S be a random source sound, L its lexical code, and eS any reconstruction computed from L alone. Then 

S → L → eS

is a Markov chain, so the data processing inequality gives 

I(S; eS) ≤ I(S; L) = HSh (L) ≤ log 2 |L| . (9) If only a subset of lexical states is ever realized, this sharpens to 

HSh (L) ≤ log 2 | supp( L)|.

Thus log 2 |L| is a distribution-free ceiling on the per-sound lexical payload, while HSh (L) is the average source information actually carried by that payload under a chosen source distribution. 

3.4 Decoder 

The decoder first maps the transmitted sentence q back to a finite lexical code, ℓ = U (q). Then, it treats the recovered labels as interval-valued acoustic constraints. The labels are converted into representative synthesis targets, then rendered as audio with a deterministic hybrid synthesizer. A refinement step closes the loop by re-analyzing the synthesized audio and adjusting a small set of features until the entire feature vector better satisfies the transmitted intervals. 

Label inversion. Each recovered label provides two objects, i.e. a midpoint value and interval: 

˜xi = Ri(ℓi) , [ai, b i) = Ii(ℓi) . (10) The representative midpoint ˜xi is used for synthesis. For example, for the RMS label mid-power ,corresponding to [0 .10 , 0.30) , the value ˜xi = 0 .20 is used. The d representatives (one per feature) are bundled into decoder parameters 

θ = B(˜ x1, . . . , ˜xd) , (11) where B groups them into temporal, spectral, harmonic, Bark-band, and psychoacoustic targets. A deterministic seed σ = hash( ℓ) is also computed from the recovered lexical code, and later used to initialize the waveform renderer. 6Remark (feature-space quantization). The lexical stage is a deterministic lossy quantizer in feature space. For any coordinate whose label ℓi corresponds to a bounded interval [ai, b i), midpoint decoding is minimax-optimal, minimizing the worst-case absolute error within the bin: 

˜xi = ai+bi 

> 2

= arg min 

> r∈[ai,b i)

sup 

> x∈[ai,b i)

|x − r|, |xi − ˜xi| ≤ 12 (bi − ai). (12) Hence, for any nonnegative weights αi,

X

> i∈B

αi(xi − ˜xi)2 ≤ 14

X

> i∈B

αi(bi − ai)2,

where B is the set of bounded coordinates. This bounds the distortion from lexicalization alone; the rendered waveform may incur additional error. 

Waveform renderer. The waveform synthesizer is a hybrid renderer that combines harmonic, modal, and noise-based components. Given decoded acoustic targets θ, an internal control vector c,and a deterministic seed σ, it produces a waveform 

˜s = G(θ, c, σ ) , (13) where σ fixes the stochastic parts of the renderer so that repeated evaluations remain reproducible. The renderer is called repeatedly during refinement. Concretely, G instantiates a harmonic sine bank for pitched content, a resonant modal layer, seeded body and transient noise, attack–decay envelopes, Bark-domain equalization, broad spectral sculpting, and final RMS normalization. The control vector c contains renderer-internal steering variables (e.g. envelope scaling, modal density, spectral shaping) that control the synthesizer in low dimension. Many decoded features in θ

are rendered directly, while others are matched only indirectly through the coupled effect of these controls. As a result, changing one control typically moves several measured features at once. The lexical code therefore specifies the acoustic region to be matched, while the control vector provides a compact way of steering a generic synthesizer toward that region; refinement then checks the rendered waveform against the full set of target intervals. Additional implementation details are deferred to Appendix E. Algorithm 1: Receiver-side decoding                                                 

> Require: Transmitted sentence q, shared vocabulary
> Ensure: Synthesized waveform ˜s
> 1: Recover the lexical code ℓ←U(q)and validate
> 2: Decode acoustic targets θfrom ℓusing Eq. (10)
> 3: Compute the deterministic seed σ←hash( ℓ)
> 4: Initialize renderer controls c0from θ
> 5: for each cvisited by the search do
> 6: Render ˆs←G(θ, c, σ )(Eq. (13))
> 7: Re-extract features ˜x←F(ˆ s)(Eq. (14))
> 8: Score the candidate (Eq. (15))
> 9: end for
> 10: Select c⋆: prefer fewer violated lexical bins, then lower score
> 11: ˜s←G(θ, c ⋆, σ )
> 12: return ˜s

Closed-loop refinement. Given decoded tar-gets θ ∈ Rd, the renderer controls are initialized at c0 and refined during optimization. For any candidate c, the decoder renders audio and re-extracts the features: 

˜x = F G(θ, c, σ ) . (14) It then scores the candidate against the transmit-ted description: 

J(c) = mismatch(˜ x, ℓ ) + reg( c, c 0) . (15) The mismatch term is small when re-extracted features lie inside the lexical intervals implied by ℓ, and grows outside them. The regularizer keeps controls near c0. We optimize J with derivative-free Powell search [Powell, 1964]; Algorithm 1 gives the full procedure. The final waveform is chosen from Powell’s candidates as the one violating the fewest lexical bins, using J(c) as a tie-breaker. This aligns refinement with the transmitted discrete description rather than over-optimizing a smooth proxy. 

# 4 Experiments 

We evaluate the full LAC pipeline with GPT-5.3-Codex sender and receiver agents at xhigh reasoning effort, using a single-turn protocol conditioned on the shared vocabulary. All runs used one Apple M2 MacBook Air with 8 CPU cores and 24 GB unified memory, totaling under 3 hours wall-clock. 7default +temporal +spectral +harmonic +bark +psychoacoustic 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00        

> Lexical-bin Accuracy
> pre-synthesis post-synthesis (a) 0816 32 64 128 256 512 1024
> Refinement Evaluations
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> Lexical-bin Accuracy
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> Throughput (samples/s) (b) (c) kickdrum snare single period electric bass

Figure 2: Feature-family and refinement analyses, plus qualitative waveform examples. (a) Lexical-bin accuracy as feature families are added cumulatively, measured both before rendering and after full synthesis. (b) Post-synthesis lexical-bin accuracy and throughput as the number of closed-loop refinement evaluations increases. (c) Four representative original waveforms ( gray ) and LAC reconstructions ( orange ). The instrument labels are approximate. Exact sample-level agreement is loose, but the main envelope and periodic structure are preserved, contributing to perceptual similarity. Corresponding audio can be heard on the demo page (samples 03, 73, 50, and 45). 

4.1 Dataset 

Table 2: Dataset statistics.          

> Stat Value Songs 307
> Samples 3707
> Mean samples / song 12.07
> Min sample dur. (s) 0.0002
> Mean sample dur. (s) 0.326
> Max sample dur. (s) 1.997
> Looped samples 2092
> Mean song dur. (s) 141.88

We constructed a new tracker music dataset. Tracker songs are self-contained modules that store both a note sequence (in ABC-like notation) and the short audio samples used to play it, commonly in formats such as .mod , .xm , and .it . They are convenient for our setting because the samples are already isolated timbral events, while the module structure still enables song-level transfer experiments. We collected ∼300 public modules and used a Python library for pars-ing 2; we retained genre-diverse songs with large acoustic variability, whose 3.7k samples are shorter than 2s. Table 2 summarizes the corpus. 

4.2 Music transfer 

Listening examples, with the corresponding LAC text descriptions, are available online. 3We encourage readers to listen to them, as they give a clear sense of the quality of the reconstructions. For song-level transfer, we separate symbolic structure from sound. The symbolic channel preserves the musical content (notes, timing, and patterns) while LAC carries the acoustic character of the instruments. Tracker modules make this separation natural: their patterns remain symbolic, and their embedded instrument samples can be replaced independently. More generally, MIDI or another score-like format could serve the same symbolic role. 

4.3 Feature-family ablation 

To assess which parts of the lexical code matter most, we add feature families cumulatively and measure lexical-bin reconstruction accuracy after each step (Figure 2a). We report two views. In 

pre-synthesis evaluation, labels are inverted to representative feature values before any waveform is rendered. In post-synthesis , the decoded targets are rendered to audio and features are re-extracted from the result. Shaded bands are 95% CIs ( ±1.96 SEM , Normal approximation, n=100 ). Pre-synthesis accuracy rises steadily and reaches 100% once all feature families are included, confirming that the encode–transmit–decode chain preserves the full lexical description. Post-synthesis is harder: the renderer must produce a waveform whose re-extracted features fall back into the intended bins. Here, Bark-band information provides the largest gain, while temporal and psychoacoustic families add little or no improvement. With all groups included, post-synthesis accuracy reaches about 74%, compared with the 100% pre-synthesis ceiling. The gap reflects a renderer limitation rather than an information loss in the textual channel. 

> 2

Archive: https://amp.dascene.net/ ; Library: https://github.com/erodola/nodmod 

> 3

Demo page: https://erodola.github.io/lac-demo/ 

84.4 Closed-loop refinement 

Closed-loop refinement improves reconstruction by repeatedly re-rendering candidate waveforms and scoring their re-extracted features. Figure 2b, plots post-synthesis lexical-bin accuracy against the evaluation budget (error bands as above). Little changes up to 16 evaluations. Gains appear at 32 evaluations, are strongest between 128 and 256, and then continue steadily. Overall, refinement raises accuracy from roughly 72% without refinement to roughly 84%, but at a corresponding runtime cost that decreases throughput approximately inversely with the number of evaluations. We used 64 evaluations in our other experiments as a reasonable tradeoff between accuracy and runtime. Figure 2c, provides a qualitative view of the same behavior. The reconstructions are not expected to match the originals pointwise: LAC is a generative acoustic channel, not a waveform codec. Even when the traces differ visibly, the reconstructions often preserve the macroscopic envelope, dominant periodicity, and tonal-versus-noisy balance that drive perceived similarity. This is best judged by listening; the corresponding examples are available on the demo page. 

# 5 Limitations 

This work has several limitations. First, the system targets short, isolated, non-speech sounds such as hits, bursts, plucks, and short notes. It is not a speech, music, or general-purpose audio codec. Its current 47-coordinate representation captures global acoustic character, but not phonetic content, speaker identity, lyrics, melody, harmony, meter, arrangement, or other long-range structure. Sustained and time-varying sounds therefore remain difficult; dedicated tests on overlapping-window descriptions proved more fragile without preserving coherent temporal continuity. Second, decoding is deliberately approximate by design. Labels invert to representative intervals rather than exact measurements. LAC therefore reconstructs sounds consistent with a lexical acoustic description, rather than recovering the original waveform exactly. Finally, symbolic music transfer is only partially developed. We currently pass symbolic structure in ABC notation, which is practical but not a general solution: describing pitch, rhythm, meter, voicing, repetition, and form in unconstrained prose quickly becomes a constraint-satisfaction (SAT-like) problem. We therefore treat this as a pragmatic extension, not as evidence that arbitrary symbolic music can already be transmitted through natural language. 

Broader impact and risks. A language-native acoustic representation could make sound synthesis and transfer more interpretable, inspectable, and controllable. Because the lexical representation is human-readable, users can audit which aspects of a sound are being preserved or altered, which is harder to do with opaque learned latents. Transferring symbolic note patterns also suggests a practical route for controllable music and sound-design workflows in which structure and timbre are manipulated separately. There are also risks. Any system that makes audio easier to describe, transfer, and reconstruct can be repurposed for imitation or spoofing, particularly if the language interface becomes more powerful. 

# 6 Conclusion 

We introduced lexical acoustic coding (LAC), a framework for communicating sound through natural language. LAC converts audio into interpretable acoustic descriptors, quantizes them into a compact lexical code, verbalizes the code as structured English, and reconstructs audio from interval-valued acoustic constraints. This places LAC between captions and codecs: more structured than free-form text, but more readable than learned latents. Experiments show that lexical descriptions preserve meaningful acoustic information through an agent-mediated text channel. We also demonstrate symbolic music transfer, where LAC carries timbre while ABC notation carries musical structure. LAC is not currently designed for exact waveform recovery, speech coding, or full music compression. It reconstructs sounds consistent with a transmitted description. Future work should address time-varying audio, improve decoding, refine the vocabulary, and evaluate with broader listening tests. 9References 

ISO/IEC 15938-4:2002 Information technology—Multimedia content description interface—Part 4: Audio, 2002. DIN 45692:2009-08: Measurement Technique for the Simulation of the Auditory Sensation of Sharpness, 2009. Andrea Agostinelli, Timo I. Denk, Zalán Borsos, Jesse Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon, Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi, Matt Sharifi, Neil Zeghidour, and Christian Frank. MusicLM: Generating music from text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.11325 ,2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2301.11325. Paul Boersma. Accurate short-term analysis of the fundamental frequency and the harmonics-to-noise ratio of a sampled sound. Proceedings of the Institute of Phonetic Sciences , 17:97–110, 1993. Zalán Borsos, Raphaël Marinier, Damien Vincent, Eugene Kharitonov, Olivier Pietquin, Matt Sharifi, Dominik Roblek, Olivier Teboul, David Grangier, Marco Tagliasacchi, and Neil Zeghidour. Au-dioLM: A language modeling approach to audio generation. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 31:2523–2533, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TASLP.2023.3288409. Marcelo Caetano, Charalampos Saitis, and Kai Siedenburg. Audio content descriptors of timbre. In Kai Siedenburg, Charalampos Saitis, Stephen McAdams, Arthur N. Popper, and Richard R. Fay, editors, Timbre: Acoustics, Perception, and Cognition , volume 69 of Springer Handbook of Auditory Research , pages 297–333. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-14832-4_11. Mark Cartwright and Bryan Pardo. Social-EQ: Crowdsourcing an equalization descriptor map. In 

Proceedings of the 14th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2013) , pages 395–400, Curitiba, Brazil, 2013. Trung Dang, Sharath Rao, Ananya Gupta, Christopher Gagne, Panagiotis Tzirakis, Alice Baird, Jakub Piotr Cłapa, Peter Chin, and Alan Cowen. TADA: A generative framework for speech modeling via text-acoustic dual alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.23068 , 2026. doi: 10.48550/ arXiv.2602.23068. Steven B. Davis and Paul Mermelstein. Comparison of parametric representations for monosyllabic word recognition in continuously spoken sentences. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing , 28(4):357–366, 1980. doi: 10.1109/TASSP.1980.1163420. Alain de Cheveigné and Hideki Kawahara. YIN, a fundamental frequency estimator for speech and music. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 111(4):1917–1930, 2002. doi: 10.1121/1.1458024. Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Yossi Adi. High fidelity neural audio compression. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. Shlomo Dubnov. Generalization of spectral flatness measure for non-gaussian linear processes. IEEE Signal Processing Letters , 11(8):698–701, 2004. Jesse Engel, Lamtharn Hantrakul, Chenjie Gu, and Adam Roberts. DDSP: Differentiable digital signal processing. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. Hugo Fastl and Eberhard Zwicker. Psychoacoustics: Facts and Models . Springer, 3 edition, 2007. Simen Gaure, Stefanos Koffas, Stjepan Picek, and Sondre Rønjom. L2 · M = C2 large language models are covert channels. In ICASSP 2025 - 2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 1–5, 2025. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP49660.2025. 10887756. Stephen Hales Swift and Kent L. Gee. Extending sharpness calculation for an alternative loudness metric input. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 142(6):EL549–EL554, 2017. doi: 10.1121/1.5016193. 10 Curtis Hawthorne, Andriy Stasyuk, Adam Roberts, Ian Simon, Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang, Sander Diele-man, Erich Elsen, Jesse Engel, and Douglas Eck. Enabling factorized piano music modeling and generation with the MAESTRO dataset. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2019. Eric J. Humphrey, Justin Salamon, Oriol Nieto, Jon Forsyth, Rachel M. Bittner, and Juan P. Bello. JAMS: A JSON annotated music specification for reproducible MIR research. In Proceedings of the 15th International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR 2014) , pages 591–596, 2014. Kristoffer Jensen. Timbre Models of Musical Sounds . PhD thesis, Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, 1999. DIKU Report 99/7. Peiwen Jiang, Chao-Kai Wen, Xinping Yi, Xiao Li, Shi Jin, and Jun Zhang. Semantic communications using foundation models: Design approaches and open issues. IEEE Wireless Communications , 31 (3):76–84, 2024. doi: 10.1109/MWC.002.2300460. Sonal Kumar, Prem Seetharaman, Justin Salamon, Dinesh Manocha, and Oriol Nieto. SILA: Signal-to-language augmentation for enhanced control in text-to-audio generation. In 2025 IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA) , pages 1–5, 2025. doi: 10.1109/WASPAA66052.2025.11230964. Olivier Lartillot and Petri Toiviainen. Mir in matlab (ii): A toolbox for musical feature extraction from audio. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR 2007) , pages 127–130, 2007. Brian McFee, Colin Raffel, Dawen Liang, Daniel P. W. Ellis, Matt McVicar, Eric Battenberg, and Oriol Nieto. librosa: Audio and music signal analysis in python. In Proceedings of the 14th Python in Science Conference (SciPy 2015) , pages 18–24, 2015. doi: 10.25080/Majora-7b98e3ed-003. Hemant Misra, Shajith Ikbal, Hervé Bourlard, and Hynek Hermansky. Spectral entropy based feature for robust asr. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing , pages 193–196, 2004. Antonio Norelli and Michael M. Bronstein. LLMs can hide text in other text of the same length. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. Geoffroy Peeters. A large set of audio features for sound description: Similarity and classification in the cuidado project. Technical report, IRCAM, 2004. Geoffroy Peeters, Bruno L. Giordano, Patrick Susini, Nicolas Misdariis, and Stephen McAdams. The timbre toolbox: Extracting audio descriptors from musical signals. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 130(5):2902–2916, 2011. doi: 10.1121/1.3642604. Neil Perry, Sanket Gupte, Nishant Pitta, and Lior Rotem. Robust steganography from large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08977 , 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2504.08977. Reinier Plomp and Willem J. M. Levelt. Tonal consonance and critical bandwidth. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , 38(4):548–560, 1965. doi: 10.1121/1.1909741. H. F. Pollard and E. V. Jansson. A tristimulus method for the specification of musical timbre. Acustica ,51:162–171, 1982. M. J. D. Powell. An efficient method for finding the minimum of a function of several variables without calculating derivatives. The Computer Journal , 7(2):155–162, 01 1964. ISSN 0010-4620. doi: 10.1093/comjnl/7.2.155. Fanny Roche, Thomas Hueber, Maëva Garnier, Samuel Limier, and Laurent Girin. Make that sound more metallic: Towards a perceptually relevant control of the timbre of synthesizer sounds using a variational autoencoder. Transactions of the International Society for Music Information Retrieval ,4(1):52–66, 2021. doi: 10.5334/tismir.76. 11 Charalampos Saitis and Stefan Weinzierl. The semantics of timbre. In Kai Siedenburg, Charalampos Saitis, Stephen McAdams, Arthur N. Popper, and Richard R. Fay, editors, Timbre: Acoustics, Perception, and Cognition , volume 69 of Springer Handbook of Auditory Research , pages 119–149. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2019. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-14832-4_5. Liang-Hsuan Tseng, Yi-Chang Chen, Kuan Yi Lee, Da-shan Shiu, and Hung-yi Lee. TASTE: Text-aligned speech tokenization and embedding for spoken language modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. Pantelis N. Vassilakis. Perceptual and Physical Properties of Amplitude Fluctuation and Their Musical Significance . PhD thesis, University of California, Los Angeles, 2001. Satvik Venkatesh, David Moffat, and Eduardo Reck Miranda. Word embeddings for automatic equalization in audio mixing. Journal of the Audio Engineering Society , 70(9):753–763, 2022. doi: 10.17743/jaes.2022.0047. Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman, Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew R. J. Nelson, Eric Jones, Robert Kern, Eric Larson, C. J. Carey, ˙ Ilhan Polat, Yu Feng, Eric W. Moore, Jake VanderPlas, Denis Laxalde, Josef Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, Charles R. Harris, Anne M. Archibald, Antonio H. Ribeiro, Fabian Pedregosa, and Paul van Mulbregt. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in python. Nature Methods , 17:261–272, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2. Yuancheng Wang, Dekun Chen, Xueyao Zhang, Junan Zhang, Jiaqi Li, and Zhizheng Wu. TaDiCodec: Text-aware diffusion speech tokenizer for speech language modeling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. Yusong Wu, Ethan Manilow, Yi Deng, Rigel Swavely, Kyle Kastner, Tim Cooijmans, Aaron Courville, Cheng-Zhi Anna Huang, and Jesse Engel. MIDI-DDSP: Detailed control of musical performance via hierarchical modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. Oral. Dongchao Yang, Yuanyuan Wang, Dading Chong, Songxiang Liu, Xixin Wu, and Helen Meng. UniAudio 2.0: A unified audio language model with text-aligned factorized audio tokenization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.04683 , 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2602.04683. Wenyi Yu, Siyin Wang, Xiaoyu Yang, Xianzhao Chen, Xiaohai Tian, Jun Zhang, Guangzhi Sun, Lu Lu, Yuxuan Wang, and Chao Zhang. SALMONN-omni: A codec-free LLM for full-duplex speech understanding and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18138 , 2024. doi: 10.48550/ arXiv.2411.18138. Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi. Sound-Stream: An end-to-end neural audio codec. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , 30:495–507, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TASLP.2021.3129994. 

# A Comparison table: axis definitions and per-method justifications 

We expand on Table 1. We first give a precise definition of each axis, then justify, method by method, the entry assigned in every cell. 

A.1 Axes Human readability. Whether the representation, as transmitted, is directly intelligible to a human reader without any decoding software. 

LLM-native transport. Whether the representation can be natively consumed and produced by general-purpose text LLMs. 

Semantic editing. Whether a user or agent can edit the representation through high-level semantic operations, such as replacing a word, adjusting an attribute, and have the change propagate to the reconstructed audio in a predictable way. 12 Acoustic interpretability. Whether the components of the representation correspond to known acoustic or perceptual quantities, allowing a domain expert to read them off acoustic properties from the representation directly, without training a probe. 

Training-free. Whether the representation itself can be obtained from the audio without the use of any machine learning model. This axis concerns only the production of the representation, not how it is later transported, modeled, or rendered back to audio. 

Generative decoding. Whether the decoder acts as a model over the representation space, capable of synthesizing plausible audio for arbitrary representation values rather than merely inverting recordings it was given. 

Bandwidth efficiency. Whether the representation is compact relative to the perceptual content it carries. 

Bit-wise reconstruction. Whether the representation allows recovery of the original waveform exactly, sample-for-sample. 

A.2 Per-method justification Lossless codec (FLAC, WAV). The transmitted form is a binary stream, opaque to humans ( Human readability : no) and to text LLMs ( LLM-native transport : no). The representation supports no semantic operations on its content ( Semantic editing : no) and exposes no acoustic descriptors (Acoustic interpretability : no). Encoding and decoding are deterministic algorithms with no learned components ( Training-free : yes). Generative decoding : no, since the decoder only inverts the encoded form: arbitrary bitstream values do not correspond to coherent audio, so the decoder is not a model over the representation space. It compresses far above the rates achievable by neural codecs at comparable quality, so we score Bandwidth efficiency : no relative to the rest of the table. The defining property of the row is exact recovery ( Bit-wise reconstruction : yes). 

Handcrafted descriptors (MFCC, spectral centroid). This row stands for handcrafted feature-vector representations as a class, including spectral centroid, brightness, roll-off, harmonicity, MFCC, and similar descriptors. The transmitted form is a floating-point vector, not directly readable ( Human readability : no), not text-tokenizable ( LLM-native transport : no), and not editable through semantic operations ( Semantic editing : no). We score Acoustic interpretability : yes because the components correspond to known acoustic and perceptual quantities; we note that higher MFCC coefficients are themselves DCT components and only weakly interpretable in isolation, but the row as a whole is dominated by physically-meaningful descriptors. Extraction is deterministic and uses no learned components ( Training-free : yes). Generative decoding : no, since there is no standard decoder that acts as a model over the descriptor space; feature-to-spectrogram approximations recover one specific spectrum rather than synthesizing plausible audio for arbitrary descriptor values. The vectors are small per second of audio ( Bandwidth efficiency : yes) but discard phase and most signal detail (Bit-wise reconstruction : no). 

Neural codec (EnCodec, SoundStream). Discrete latent tokens are not human-readable ( Human readability : no). We assign LLM-native transport : partial because these tokens are widely consumed by audio language models such as AudioLM [Borsos et al., 2023] and MusicLM [Agostinelli et al., 2023], so they do flow through language-style sequence models; however, those models rely on codec-specific token vocabularies and audio-side modeling rather than general-purpose text LLMs operating on the stream as ordinary text. The tokens expose no semantic edit interface ( Semantic editing : no) and no interpretable acoustic axes ( Acoustic interpretability : no). Encoder and decoder are jointly trained ( Training-free : no). Generative decoding : yes, because the neural decoder is trained as a model over the latent space and synthesizes plausible audio for arbitrary token sequences, including modified or sampled ones. The codec operates at low bitrate ( Bandwidth efficiency : yes), without exact recovery ( Bit-wise reconstruction : no). 

Audio-language tokenizers (AudioLM, TASTE, TaDiCodec, TADA, UniAudio 2.0). The tokens themselves are not human-readable ( Human readability : no). We assign LLM-native transport :partial because these tokenizations are designed for joint modeling with text by language-model-style architectures (often via text-alignment, interleaving, or hierarchical semantic/acoustic decomposi-tions), which moves them closer to text-LM territory than codec tokens. They still fall short of 13 native text transport, however: the tokens live in a custom audio vocabulary and require a model that has been trained or fine-tuned on that vocabulary; a pretrained general-purpose text LLM cannot consume them as-is. Semantic editing : partial applies only to the text-aligned subset of this family (TASTE [Tseng et al., 2026], TADA [Dang et al., 2026], TaDiCodec [Wang et al., 2025]). The audio tokens themselves remain opaque integers and cannot be edited directly; editing operates on the text that conditions or accompanies the tokens, and the decoder rerenders audio under the modified text. Methods without text conditioning (AudioLM [Borsos et al., 2023], vanilla acoustic-token branches such as those in UniAudio 2.0 [Yang et al., 2026]) do not support semantic editing at all. The latents are learned and not perceptually interpretable ( Acoustic interpretability : no), require training ( Training-free : no), and pair with neural decoders that act as models over the token space, synthesizing plausible audio for arbitrary token sequences ( Generative decoding : yes), at low rates (Bandwidth efficiency : yes), without exact recovery ( Bit-wise reconstruction : no). 

Unconstrained text caption. A caption is text ( Human readability : yes), natively handled by LLMs ( LLM-native transport : yes), and semantically editable by construction ( Semantic editing :yes). Acoustic interpretability : partial acknowledges that captions describe sounds at a semantic rather than acoustic level (“a dog barks in a hallway” identifies source and scene but does not commit to spectral content), so the representation is interpretable in a weaker sense than a descriptor vector. We score Training-free : yes because a caption is a piece of text that can be produced without any model (by a human listener, for example), so the representation itself does not require a learned encoder, even though captioners are commonly used in practice. Generative decoding : yes, since the text-to-audio decoder is a generative model over the caption space and synthesizes plausible audio for arbitrary captions. Captions can be longer than the perceptual content they convey, especially when a single descriptor would suffice ( Bandwidth efficiency : no), and recovery is not exact ( Bit-wise reconstruction : no). 

LAC (this paper). LAC transmits a constrained natural-language sentence over classical acoustic descriptors. The sentence is text, hence Human readability : yes and LLM-native transport : yes. 

Semantic editing : yes because the sentence is parsed into the descriptor vector through a fixed vocabu-lary mapping, so an edit to a word induces a predictable edit on the descriptor and on the synthesized audio. The descriptors are physically meaningful by construction ( Acoustic interpretability : yes). 

Training-free : yes because the representation can be obtained by deterministic feature extraction followed by rule-based lexicalization and a human turning it into prose, with no learned encoder; in practice we use an LLM to phrase the sentence, but this is a convenience rather than a requirement, mirroring the caption case. Generative decoding : yes because the synthesizer renders plausible audio for arbitrary descriptor vectors, acting as a model over the representation space; the synthesizer itself is deterministic given the descriptors, but its role is generative as the representation supports synthesis of arbitrary content, not just inversion of recorded points. Sentences are longer per second of audio than neural-codec tokens but substantially shorter than free-form captions, so we score Bandwidth efficiency : partial. Reconstruction is necessarily lossy ( Bit-wise reconstruction : no). 

# B Feature inventory 

Table 3 reports all 47 features in canonical extraction order, with concise operational definitions. Table 3: Type legend. T: Temporal; S: Spectral; H: Harmonic; B: Psychoacoustic Bark-band; N:Psychoacoustic non-Bark.                  

> Type Feature What it captures
> Trms_energy Root-mean-square of waveform samples; overall energy.
> Tcrest_factor_db 20 log 10 (peak /RMS ); transient peakiness vs average level.
> Tzero_crossing_rate Zero crossings per second (sign changes / duration).
> Tlog_attack_time log 10 time for smoothed envelope to rise from 20% to 90% of peak.
> Tattack_slope_db_s Attack slope in dB/s between 10% and 90% of peak envelope.
> Ttemporal_centroid Energy centroid of frame RMS along time, normalized by duration.
> Tdecay_time_s Exponential decay time constant from log-envelope regression after peak.
> Continued on next page

14 Type Feature What it captures 

S spectral_centroid_hz Magnitude-weighted mean frequency (Hz), averaged over frames. 

S spectral_flatness Geometric/arithmetic mean of power spectrum (Wiener entropy), avg. over frames. 

S spectral_rolloff_hz Frequency below which 85% of spectral energy lies, averaged over frames. 

S spectral_flux Mean squared positive change between successive magnitude spectra. 

S spectral_kurtosis Fourth standardized moment of mean magnitude spectrum. 

S spectral_entropy Normalized Shannon entropy of power spectrum (mean spectrum). 

S spectral_irregularity Jensen irregularity: sum of squared adjacent-bin diffs / total squared mag. 

H f0_hz Fundamental frequency via YIN; median of per-frame estimates. 

H harmonic_noise_ratio_db HNR in dB from normalized autocorrelation peak, avg. over frames. 

H inharmonicity Amplitude-weighted avg. relative deviation of partials from k · f0.

H tristimulus_1 Energy ratio of harmonic 1 to total harmonic energy. 

H tristimulus_2 Energy ratio of harmonics 2-4 to total harmonic energy. 

H tristimulus_3 Energy ratio of harmonics 5+ to total harmonic energy. 

H odd_even_harmonic_ratio Ratio of odd-harmonic energy to even-harmonic energy. 

B bark_band_1 Log(1+band power) in 20-100 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_2 Log(1+band power) in 100-200 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_3 Log(1+band power) in 200-300 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_4 Log(1+band power) in 300-400 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_5 Log(1+band power) in 400-510 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_6 Log(1+band power) in 510-630 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_7 Log(1+band power) in 630-770 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_8 Log(1+band power) in 770-920 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_9 Log(1+band power) in 920-1080 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_10 Log(1+band power) in 1080-1270 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_11 Log(1+band power) in 1270-1480 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_12 Log(1+band power) in 1480-1720 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_13 Log(1+band power) in 1720-2000 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_14 Log(1+band power) in 2000-2320 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_15 Log(1+band power) in 2320-2700 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_16 Log(1+band power) in 2700-3150 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_17 Log(1+band power) in 3150-3700 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_18 Log(1+band power) in 3700-4400 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_19 Log(1+band power) in 4400-5300 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_20 Log(1+band power) in 5300-6400 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_21 Log(1+band power) in 6400-7700 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_22 Log(1+band power) in 7700-9500 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_23 Log(1+band power) in 9500-12000 Hz critical band. 

B bark_band_24 Log(1+band power) in 12000-15500 Hz critical band. 

N sharpness_acum Zwicker sharpness (acum) using DIN 45692 g(z) and Bark-band 

E0.23 .

N roughness Vassilakis roughness from pairwise peak interactions (Plomp-Levelt curve). 

# C Feature provenance 

This appendix documents the provenance of the 47 acoustic descriptors used in the LAC feature extractor. Table 4 groups each feature by its closest reference implementation or off-the-shelf analogue, showing that the lexical code is grounded in established DSP descriptors rather than learned latent variables. 15 Table 4: Reference implementation of the 47 acoustic descriptors. 

Feature Reference / off-the-shelf analogue 

> rms_energy

,

> zero_crossing_rate

,

> spectral_centroid_hz

,

> spectral_rolloff_hz

librosa [McFee et al., 2015] implementation of standard DSP features 

> crest_factor_db

,

> log_attack_time

,

> attack_slope_db_s

,

> temporal_centroid

,

> spectral_kurtosis

,

> spectral_flux

,

> odd_even_harmonic_ratio

,

> inharmonicity

Timbre Toolbox [Peeters et al., 2011] implementation of MPEG–7 [iso, 2002] and CUIDADO [Peeters, 2004] features  

> decay_time_s

Adapted from standard decay/envelope fitting; related to Tim-bre Toolbox temporal decrease descriptors [Peeters et al., 2011]  

> spectral_flatness

[Dubnov, 2004, Peeters et al., 2011]; also in librosa  

> spectral_entropy

Eq. (2) in [Misra et al., 2004]  

> spectral_irregularity

Spectral irregularity / timbre-model descriptor [Jensen, 1999, Peeters et al., 2011]  

> f0_hz

[de Cheveigné and Kawahara, 2002]; also in librosa  

> harmonic_noise_ratio_db

Eq. (4) in [Boersma, 1993]  

> tristimulus_1..3

[Pollard and Jansson, 1982, Peeters et al., 2011]  

> bark_band_1..24

Bark critical bands [Fastl and Zwicker, 2007]  

> sharpness_acum

DIN/Zwicker-style sharpness [din, 2009, Fastl and Zwicker, 2007, Hales Swift and Gee, 2017]  

> roughness

[Plomp and Levelt, 1965, Vassilakis, 2001, Virtanen et al., 2020] 

# D Full Feature Vocabulary Mapping 

This appendix includes the full feature-to-vocabulary mapping used by the lexical encoder, as well as a detailed specification of the backward Ri : Ai → R maps. 

D.1 Representative values for lexical inversion 

At decode time, each lexical label is used in two different ways. First, it defines the interval associated with the transmitted lexical bin; that interval is retained for constraint checking during refinement. Second, it is mapped to a single representative numeric value used to initialize or directly set synthesis parameters. These two roles should not be conflated: the interval is the target set, whereas the representative is only a deterministic anchor inside or near that set. 16 For a label whose interval is [l, u ), the generic representative-value rule applies: 

rep( l, u ) = 



NaN , l = u = NaN ,l + u

2 , l, u ∈ R, (midpoint) 

1.5 l, u = + ∞, l > 0,

1.0, u = + ∞, l = 0 ,

1.5 |l| + 1 .0, u = + ∞, l < 0,

0.5 u, l = −∞ , u > 0,u − |u|

2 − 1.0, l = −∞ , u ≤ 0.

(16) Equation (16) is used for 245 out of 285 bins, excluding the f0_hz feature which uses a geometric mean, being log-spaced (see below). For finite intervals, Eq. (16) computes the ordinary arithmetic midpoint. For open-ended intervals, however, there is no true midpoint, so the decoder uses a simple deter-ministic heuristic instead. These open-ended representatives are synthesis anchors that work well in practice. Sentinel labels that represent undefined or structurally absent values are mapped to NaN rather than to any finite number. In the current vocabulary this includes, for example, labels such as unpitched ,

> onset-undetected

, slope-undefined , and non-decaying . This is important because the decoder distinguishes between a finite target and the explicit absence of that target. 

Bark-band labels. Bark-band labels are composite strings such as dominant rumble or present air . For these features, the band identity is carried by the feature name itself ( bark_band_1 , . . . , 

> bark_band_24

), while the representative value is determined only by the first word of the lexical label, i.e., the level prefix ( silent , trace , faint , present , strong , dominant , overwhelming ). As a result,  

> dominant rumble

and dominant air share the same numeric representative; what differs between them is the Bark-band index, not the level value itself. Applying Eq. (16) to the finite Bark levels yields the representatives 

> silent

7→ 0.005, trace 7→ 1.005, faint 7→ 3.5, present 7→ 6.5, strong 7→ 9.5, dominant 7→ 13.0. The open-ended Bark level overwhelming would generically map to 1.5 × 15 = 22 .5, but for better qualitative results we override this and use  

> overwhelming

7 → 18.0 instead, to keep the Bark targets in a more conservative range for synthesis. 

Special treatment of f0_hz . Fundamental-frequency labels are treated differently from ordinary finite bins because the pitch vocabulary is logarithmically spaced. For any finite positive f0_hz 

interval [l, u ), the representative value is taken to be the geometric mean 

rep f0 (l, u ) = √lu, (17) rather than the arithmetic midpoint. This places the representative at the center of the bin on the log-frequency axis, which is the natural geometry of the pitch partition. If an f0_hz interval touches zero or is open-ended, the implementation falls back to the generic rule in Eq. (16) . The sentinel  

> unpitched

label maps to NaN .

Overrides. After the generic representative-value rule is applied, a small number of labels are replaced with hard-coded representatives. These overrides act as post-processing adjustments used to keep open-ended or extreme labels within a numerically and physically reasonable range for synthesis. Table 5 lists all explicit overrides used by the decoder. 17 Table 5: Representative-value overrides. These hand-selected values are used only for labels whose generic inversion value would be uninformative or implausible. 

Feature Label Value 

rms_energy thunderous 0.75 

crest_factor_db spiky 22.0 

zero_crossing_rate extreme-oscillation 15,000.0 

log_attack_time snap-onset −3.2

log_attack_time creeping-onset −1.0

attack_slope_db_s explosive 18,000.0 

decay_time_s endless 12.0 

spectral_centroid_hz sizzling 14,000.0 

spectral_rolloff_hz open-ceiling 16,000.0 

spectral_spread_hz ultra-wide 7,000.0 

spectral_skewness extreme-asymmetry 75.0 

spectral_kurtosis needle-point 5,000.0 

spectral_slope ascending 0.00005 

harmonic_noise_ratio_db pristine 20.0 

harmonic_noise_ratio_db noise-engulfed −5.0

inharmonicity warped 0.15 

odd_even_harmonic_ratio fundamentals-only 75.0 

sharpness_acum piercing 6.0 

roughness abrasive 0.85 

In summary, the decoder does not uniformly use literal midpoints. For finite bins it uses arithmetic midpoints; for open-ended bins it uses deterministic heuristic representatives; for finite positive 

f0_hz bins it uses geometric means; and for a small number of extreme labels it applies hand-chosen overrides. The interval itself remains the authoritative lexical constraint during refinement, while the representative value serves only as a stable numeric anchor for synthesis. 

D.2 Full lexical code 

rms_energy 

[0 .0, 0.02) : whisper 

[0 .02 , 0.1) : hushed 

[0 .1, 0.3) : mid-power 

[0 .3, 0.55) : forceful 

[0 .55 , ∞): thunderous crest_factor_db 

[0 .0, 5.0) : sustained 

[5 .0, 10 .0) : rounded 

[10 .0, 14 .0) : punchy 

[14 .0, 17 .0) : impulsive 

[17 .0, ∞): spiky zero_crossing_rate 

[0 .0, 100 .0) : infrasonic 

[100 .0, 500 .0) : low-oscillation 

[500 .0, 2000 .0) : mid-oscillation 

[2000 .0, 10000 .0) : high-oscillation 

[10000 .0, ∞): extreme-oscillation log_attack_time 

NaN : onset-undetected 

[−∞ , −2.8) : snap-onset 

[−2.8, −2.5) : swift-onset 

[−2.5, −2.0) : moderate-onset 

18 [−2.0, −1.5) : gradual-onset 

[−1.5, ∞): creeping-onset attack_slope_db_s 

NaN : slope-undefined 

[0 .0, 3000 .0) : feathered 

[3000 .0, 8000 .0) : measured 

[8000 .0, 14000 .0) : aggressive 

[14000 .0, ∞): explosive temporal_centroid 

[0 .0, 0.15) : front-loaded 

[0 .15 , 0.25) : front-weighted 

[0 .25 , 0.4) : centered 

[0 .4, 0.55) : evenly-distributed 

[0 .55 , 1.0) : back-loaded decay_time_s 

NaN : non-decaying 

[0 .0, 0.04) : clipped 

[0 .04 , 0.12) : staccato 

[0 .12 , 0.4) : short-decay 

[0 .4, 2.0) : lingering 

[2 .0, 10 .0) : ringing 

[10 .0, ∞): endless spectral_centroid_hz 

[0 .0, 150 .0) : subterranean 

[150 .0, 500 .0) : dark 

[500 .0, 2000 .0) : warm 

[2000 .0, 5000 .0) : bright 

[5000 .0, 10000 .0) : brilliant 

[10000 .0, ∞): sizzling spectral_flatness 

[0 .0, 0.001) : pure-tone 

[0 .001 , 0.01) : near-tonal 

[0 .01 , 0.1) : semi-tonal 

[0 .1, 0.4) : noise-heavy 

[0 .4, ∞): white-noise spectral_rolloff_hz 

[0 .0, 200 .0) : deep-ceiling 

[200 .0, 1000 .0) : low-ceiling 

[1000 .0, 5000 .0) : mid-ceiling 

[5000 .0, 12000 .0) : high-ceiling 

[12000 .0, ∞): open-ceiling spectral_flux 

[0 .0, 0.5) : frozen 

[0 .5, 1.5) : drifting 

[1 .5, 3.0) : churning 

[3 .0, 6.0) : surging 

[6 .0, ∞): volatile spectral_kurtosis 

[0 .0, 3.0) : flat-topped 

[3 .0, 30 .0) : gentle-peak 

[30 .0, 300 .0) : concentrated 

19 [300 .0, 3000 .0) : towering 

[3000 .0, ∞): needle-point spectral_entropy 

[0 .0, 0.15) : crystalline 

[0 .15 , 0.35) : ordered 

[0 .35 , 0.6) : semi-diffuse 

[0 .6, 0.85) : diffuse 

[0 .85 , ∞): chaotic spectral_irregularity 

[0 .0, 0.02) : glass-smooth 

[0 .02 , 0.1) : even-contour 

[0 .1, 0.3) : rippled 

[0 .3, 0.55) : serrated 

[0 .55 , ∞): comb-like harmonic_noise_ratio_db 

NaN : unpitched 

[−∞ , −3.0) : noise-engulfed 

[−3.0, 3.0) : murky 

[3 .0, 8.0) : hazy 

[8 .0, 14 .0) : limpid 

[14 .0, ∞): pristine inharmonicity 

NaN : unpitched 

[0 .0, 0.001) : locked 

[0 .001 , 0.005) : finely-tuned 

[0 .005 , 0.02) : slightly-detuned 

[0 .02 , 0.1) : stretched 

[0 .1, ∞): warped tristimulus_1 

NaN : unpitched 

[0 .0, 0.3) : recessed-fundamental 

[0 .3, 0.6) : balanced-fundamental 

[0 .6, 0.85) : dominant-fundamental 

[0 .85 , ∞): solo-fundamental tristimulus_2 

NaN : unpitched 

[0 .0, 0.1) : hollow-body 

[0 .1, 0.25) : thin-body 

[0 .25 , 0.4) : present-body 

[0 .4, ∞): lush-body tristimulus_3 

NaN : unpitched 

[0 .0, 0.05) : bare-upper 

[0 .05 , 0.15) : sparse-overtones 

[0 .15 , 0.3) : moderate-overtones 

[0 .3, ∞): rich-overtones odd_even_harmonic_ratio 

NaN : unpitched 

[0 .0, 0.5) : even-biased 

[0 .5, 1.5) : balanced-parity 

[1 .5, 5.0) : odd-leaning 

20 [5 .0, 50 .0) : odd-heavy 

[50 .0, ∞): fundamentals-only sharpness_acum 

[0 .0, 1.3) : dull 

[1 .3, 2.0) : mellow 

[2 .0, 3.0) : keen 

[3 .0, 4.5) : cutting 

[4 .5, ∞): piercing roughness 

[0 .0, 0.01) : silky 

[0 .01 , 0.15) : sleek 

[0 .15 , 0.4) : textured 

[0 .4, 0.7) : gritty 

[0 .7, ∞): abrasive 

D.2.1 Bark features  

> bark_levels

(shared by all bark_band_* features): 

[0 .0, 0.01) : silent 

[0 .01 , 2.0) : trace 

[2 .0, 5.0) : faint 

[5 .0, 8.0) : present 

[8 .0, 11 .0) : strong 

[11 .0, 15 .0) : dominant 

[15 .0, ∞): overwhelming bark_bands (band index → keyword): 

band 1 : rumble 

band 2 : thump 

band 3 : boom 

band 4 : boxiness 

band 5 : honk 

band 6 : quack 

band 7 : clang 

band 8 : punch 

band 9 : bite 

band 10 : twang 

band 11 : ring 

band 12 : tang 

band 13 : edge 

band 14 : chime 

band 15 : zing 

band 16 : crackle 

band 17 : sibilance 

band 18 : fizz 

band 19 : sheen 

band 20 : sparkle 

band 21 : glint 

band 22 : air 

band 23 : vapor 

band 24 : ether 

Bark band labels are composed as { level } { keyword }. For example, for bark band 6 and level 

[15 .0, ∞), we get an overwhelming quack .21 D.2.2 Fundamental frequency features ( f0_hz )

Except for NaN (mapped to unpitched ), these labels are generated procedurally. There are 8 × 12 × 3 = 288 finite bins, covering [0 , 5120) Hz in 36 equal-ratio bins per octave. Let 

r ∈ { 0, . . . , 7} be the register index, n ∈ { 0, . . . , 11 } the chromatic index, and m ∈ { 0, 1, 2} the microstep index. Define the global bin index 

k = 36 r + 3 n + m. 

The corresponding interval is 

Ik =

([0 .0, 20 · 21/36 ), k = 0 ,

[20 · 2k/ 36 , 20 · 2(k+1) /36 ), k = 1 , . . . , 287 .

Its lexical label is composed as 

{register (r)} { chromatic (n)} { micro (m)}. 

> f0_registers

(register index → word): 

0: sub 

1: cellar 

2: chest 

3: middle 

4: lumen 

5: aloft 

6: crystal 

7: stratos f0_chromatic (chromatic index → word): 

0: do 

1: di 

2: re 

3: ri 

4: mi 

5: fa 

6: fi 

7: sol 

8: si 

9: la 

10 : li 

11 : ti f0_micro (microstep index → word): 

0: shadow 

1: heart 

2: crown 

For example: • (r, n, m ) = (0 , 0, 0) gives sub do shadow ;• (r, n, m ) = (1 , 0, 0) gives cellar do shadow ;• (r, n, m ) = (4 , 7, 2) gives lumen sol crown .

# E Decoder implementation details 

We report additional implementation details that are useful for reproduction but are not needed to understand the main decoding pipeline. 

Code and data for full reproducibility will be made publicly available upon acceptance. 

22 Seed. The seed σ is defined from the recovered lexical code ℓ as σ = hash( ℓ). This way, paraphras-ing at the sentence level does not change the sound as long as the recovered code is the same. In our implementation, the seed is computed once at the start of decoding by hashing the canonical token sequence with SHA-256 and taking the first 32 bits. It is computed before refinement, and the same seed is reused for every synthesis call during refinement and for the final render. That makes the stochastic renderer reproducible and keeps the optimization objective stable instead of changing randomly across evaluations. 

Duration. The decoded attack time is obtained from the log-attack representative. Undefined attack falls back to 1 ms, while decay time falls back to 0.5 s. The renderer uses 

duration = attack + 4 · decay ,

clamped to [0 .05 , 5.0] seconds. If a target sample length is supplied, the attack and decay constants are rescaled so that the output has exactly that length while preserving their relative shape. 

Renderer controls. Our current implementation uses a 15-dimensional control vector c with the following parameters: • source gains ( 4×): harmonic, modal, noise, transient; • temporal scales ( 3×): transient decay, noise decay, body decay; • resonance / texture controls ( 2×): modal density, roughness; • spectral-shaping controls ( 6×): body pivot, transient brightness, spectral tilt, low emphasis, high emphasis, spectral spread shape. These controls are initialized deterministically from the decoded features. We emphasize that these are renderer controls meant to simplify decoding, not additional acoustic descriptors. They admit different implementations and are not required to follow our exact recipe. When instructing a coding agent, a possible prompt could be: 

"Implement a hybrid renderer with harmonic, modal, body-noise, and transient-noise layers, then expose a small set of monotonic macro-controls that scale source mixture, decay times, resonance density, roughness, and broad spectral shaping." 

More details for improving stability and predictability are given below (exact formulas can differ across implementations): • Harmonic gain: multiplies the pitched harmonic layer before mixing. Increasing it makes the sound more tonal, periodic, and pitch-dominant. • Modal gain: multiplies the bank of damped resonant modes. Increasing it strengthens body-like resonance and pitched or quasi-pitched ringing that is not strictly harmonic. • Noise gain: multiplies the body-noise layer. Increasing it raises broadband noisy energy in the sustained part of the sound. • Transient gain: multiplies the transient-noise layer. Increasing it makes the onset sharper, noisier, and more attack-heavy. • Transient decay scale: scales the decay time of the transient envelope. Larger values produce longer, more extended attacks; smaller values produce shorter and more percussive attacks. • Noise decay scale: scales the decay of the broadband noise component. Larger values keep noisy energy present for longer. • Body decay scale: scales the decay of the resonant/body portion of the sound. Larger values produce longer ringing or sustain. • Modal density: controls how many modal resonances are active, or how densely they fill the frequency axis. Increasing it makes the resonant layer thicker and more diffuse. • Roughness: controls local detuning, beating, jitter, or nearby companion resonances. Increasing it makes the sound harsher, buzzier, or more beating-rich. 23 • Body pivot: sets the pivot frequency around which broad spectral shaping is applied. Intuitively, it determines the frequency region relative to which the body is made darker or brighter. • Transient brightness: increases high-frequency emphasis in the transient layer. Larger values yield a crisper or splashier onset. • Spectral tilt: applies a broadband slope to the spectrum, typically in the log-frequency domain. Increasing it shifts energy toward high frequencies; decreasing it shifts energy toward low frequencies. • Low emphasis: applies broad low-frequency boost or attenuation, similar to a coarse low-shelf control. • High emphasis: applies broad high-frequency boost or attenuation, similar to a coarse high-shelf control. • Spectral spread shape: controls how concentrated or diffuse energy is around the main spectral mass. Increasing it broadens the spectrum; decreasing it makes the spectrum more compact. A useful way to think about these controls is that they act on mechanisms, not directly on features. For example, spectral tilt , high emphasis , and transient brightness all influence measured descriptors such as centroid, rolloff, flatness, and sharpness, but they do so indirectly through broad spectral shaping. Likewise, modal density , roughness , and the various gains can influence several measured features at once. This is intentional: the controls are low-dimensional steering variables for the renderer, while the transmitted lexical features remain the external acoustic targets. A minimal implementation can realize these controls by mixing four source layers (harmonic, modal, body noise, transient noise), applying separate attack/decay envelopes, then applying broad post-mix spectral shaping and RMS normalization. 

Hybrid source model. The harmonic layer is an additive sine bank with up to 24 partials. Partial frequencies follow 

fk = kf 0

p1 + βk 2,

where β is the decoded inharmonicity. Partial amplitudes are allocated from the decoded tristimulus coefficients and adjusted by the odd/even harmonic ratio. The modal layer places damped sinusoids near Bark-band center frequencies. The noise layers are deterministic white-noise bursts seeded from the lexical code and shaped with Bark-domain equalization. All layers are shaped by linear-attack/exponential-decay envelopes and mixed according to the current renderer controls. 24