Title: Are Multilingual Models Actually Improving? Isolating True Cross-Lingual Transfer

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.21954v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 01:51:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
## Are Multilingual Models Actually Improving? Isolating True Cross-Lingual Transfer 

Prasoon Bajpai 1*, Eleftheria Briakou 1, Colin Cherry 1, Preethi Jyothi 1,2 , Vihari Piratla 1,† 

> 1

Google DeepMind 

> 2

Indian Institute of Technology Bombay 

Abstract 

Cross-lingual transfer is a model’s ability to generalize capabilities from well-represented source languages to under-represented target languages. Existing measures of a model’s transfer strength conflate improvements in transfer with general improvements to accu-racy in the source language. We advocate for an alternate metric that reliably captures trans-fer strength called Hardness Adjusted Transfer (HAT) Score, and use it to derive multiple in-sights on factors influencing transfer strength. Our analysis across twenty diverse language models and three popular mainstream multi-lingual benchmarks argues that 1) transfer in small models is not broken, 2) we are making slower than expected progress in cross-lingual transfer with model size, and 3) we have made clear progress over time. 

1 Introduction 

Most large language models (LLMs) officially sup-port multiple non-English languages (Comanici et al., 2025; Singh et al., 2026; Anthropic, 2025). However, significant performance gaps across lan-guages are known to exist (Cohere Labs, 2024; Hu et al., 2025b), thus putting certain demographics at a technological disadvantage. Cross-lingual trans-fer (XLT), the ability of an LLM to transfer perfor-mance from a source language (such as English) to other target languages, is critical for achieving cross-lingual performance parity (Pires et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2020; Philippy et al., 2023). Improve-ments on multilingual benchmarks are commonly interpreted as evidence of improved XLT (Hu et al., 2020). In this work, we examine this assumption carefully and question whether gains in target lan-guage performance necessarily signal improved XLT. Transfer strength is characterized by the fraction of performance translating from source to target  

> *prbajpai@google.com †vpiratla@google.com

languages. Therefore, we may declare improve-ments in transfer if target accuracy improved for the same value of source accuracy. In practice, however, source and target accuracies are linearly coupled with goodness of fit ( R2) exceeding 0.94 as shown in Figure 1, i.e., target accuracy follows predictably from source accuracy. The surprising linear trend is further discussed in Section 3. The coupled performance growth calls to question the standard measures of XLT such as (1) the abso-lute performance on target language, or (2) relative performance with source language, because they do not adjust for general improvements to source accuracy. Both source and target accuracies may increase with general improvements such as factuality, rea-soning, or model size, but increased target accuracy, a typical measure of cross-lingual transfer, need not imply progress on transfer. Source-target perfor-mance gap is another standard measure of transfer. We observe from the left plot of Figure 1 that both target accuracy and performance gap increase as source accuracy increases. While increasing target accuracy implies progress on XLT, increasing gap indicates worsening XLT. Together, they paint a conflicting narrative on XLT progress, which war-rants a closer study. We argue that an ideal transfer metric should measure improvements in expected target accura-cies while adjusting for improvements in source accuracies. More precisely, in order to measure XLT, it is important to disentangle the effect of tar-get improvements that simply follow from source improvements and measure when the model’s accu-racy lies above the expected correlation line (shown in Figure 1). Motivated by these observations, this paper re-thinks how we define progress in cross-lingual transfer. Our contributions are summarized below. • We show that existing measures of cross-1  

> arXiv:2606.21954v1 [cs.CL] 20 Jun 2026 Source Accuracy Source Accuracy Source Accuracy
> Target  Accuracy
> MMLU-ProX-Lite MGSMv2 ECLeKTic

Figure 1: Target accuracy scales predictably from source accuracy. Evaluation with twenty diverse LLMs across multilingual benchmarks ECLeKTic, MGSMv2, and MMLU-ProX-Lite reveals a linear trend. For MGSMv2 and MMLU-ProX-Lite, we set English as the source language, while for ECLeKTic, the source language varies per question as defined by the dataset. Target is a subset of non-source languages. Because the improvements in source and target accuracies are coupled, traditional XLT metrics conflate general source-language improvements with transfer. Please see Section 3 for more details and context. 

lingual gaps do not reflect true progress on XLT, and derive an ideal measure from first principles called the Hardness Adjusted Transfer (HAT) score. • Leveraging our calibrated XLT measure, we present insights on XLT influencing model choices such as thinking, parameter counts and language scripts. • We show a linear trend between source and target accuracies across twenty models and three multilingual datasets spanning factual-ity and reasoning. This strong linear trend is interesting given the diversity in model class, size and thinking budget. We analyze progress over time and find that MMLU-ProX-Lite and MGSMv2 are both nearly solved in terms of XLT, highlighting the need for more challeng-ing multilingual benchmarks. 

2 Related Work 

Multilingual Generalization. Recent LLM-era benchmarks, including XTREME (Hu et al., 2020), XSQuAD (Artetxe et al., 2020), MGSM (Shi et al., 2022), MMLU-ProX (Xuan et al., 2025), ECLeK-Tic (Goldman et al., 2025), and MuBench (Han et al., 2025), shift multilingual evaluation towards assessing generative capabilities such as factual question answering and reasoning. This broader evaluation landscape revealed inconsistencies in model performance across languages of different resources and scripts (Xu et al., 2025; Hengle et al., 2024; Han et al., 2025; Xuan et al., 2025). Com-plementary analyses suggest that these failures re-flect differences in internal alignment, shared mul-tilingual computation, and, in some cases, English-mediated latent processing (Zhao et al., 2024; Ifer-gan et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024). 

Metrics for XLT. Typically, XLT is measured via target accuracy (Xuan et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2020) or the cross-lingual transfer gap (XLT gap) (Hu et al., 2020; Chi et al., 2021), i.e., the absolute difference between source and target accuracy. Re-cently, ECLeKTic used a “Transfer score” that measures target accuracy conditioned on correct source prediction (Goldman et al., 2025). Com-plementary white-box work probes XLT through the model’s internal structure: cross-lingual neu-ron overlap asks whether languages share feature-selective neurons (Wang et al., 2024), neuron ac-tivation overlap measures whether parallel inputs recruit similar circuits (Hu et al., 2025a), and sub-network similarity compares the language-specific computation used for transfer (Yun et al., 2023). These techniques require model access and rely on the interpretability of internal activations, mak-ing them complementary to black-box, behavioural metrics such as ours. 

XLT as Unsupervised Domain Adaptation. We are motivated by recent works modelling XLT as an unsupervised domain adaptation problem (Piratla et al., 2025), where source and target languages define domains with shared task semantics. Several prior works on domain adaptation highlight that target performance cannot be interpreted indepen-dently of source competence (Ben-David et al., 22010; Mansour et al., 2023; Miller et al., 2021). We take inspiration from these studies to propose a more principled metric to measure XLT. 

3 Target and Source Accuracies are Coupled 

For all the models and datasets described in Sec-tion 5, we plotted the source and target accuracy values in Figure 1. Also shown in each plot is the best linear fit in red and the line of perfect transfer, shown as a dashed line. The figure helps illumi-nate the nature of cross-lingual gaps at a glance, (1) target accuracy improves with source accuracy, and (2) target accuracy is often worse than that of source but not by much. We observe that source and target accuracies fol-low a strong linear trend for all datasets and models (with the goodness of fit R2 exceeding 0.94). This phenomenon is reminiscent of out-of-distribution accuracy falling on a line with in-distribution ac-curacy (Barbu et al., 2019; Miller et al., 2021; Salaudeen and Hardt, 2025). It is surprising that the strong linear trend continues to hold despite no clean separation of train-test splits and across various model architectures. Since source and target accuracies are coupled, we cannot declare progress in XLT through source or target accuracy in isolation. An ideal measure of improvement in transfer must discount the im-provements to target accuracy arising from general improvements in source accuracy. In the next sec-tion, we derive the standard measures from first principles, explain why they are misaligned for measuring XLT progress, and introduce our pro-posed metric. 

4 Proposed XLT Metric: HAT Score 

Let S, T ℓ ∈ [0 , 1] denote the model’s instance-level source and target language ℓ pass-rates, respec-tively. Pass-rate is the fraction of times the model responds correctly, for instance the pass-rate (@10) of 0.3 indicates the model is correct only three out of ten times on a particular prompt. When a model achieves language parity, the model is expected to achieve comparable pass-rates in both source and target, i.e., E[Tℓ | S = s] = s, ∀ℓ, s ∈ [0 , 1] .We will formally define standard measures of XLT and argue why they do not indicate true progress in XLT. 

(1) Average Target Accuracy. The average tar-get accuracy for a given model M on a dataset 

D is expressed as ED,ℓ [Tℓ|M ], which can also be written as a weighted aggregation of conditional expectations as shown below. Avg. target accuracy ≜ ED,ℓ [Tℓ | M ]= ES [ED,ℓ [Tℓ | S, M ]] =

Z 10

ED,ℓ [Tℓ | S = s, M ]pS (s | M ) ds (1) For the sake of argument, consider two models: 

M1, M 2 with comparable source-conditional target accuracies, i.e., E[Tℓ | S = s, M 1] = E[Tℓ | S =

s, M 2], ∀s ∈ [0 , 1] but with the difference that 

pS (s | M1) is shifted to the right of pS (s | M2).Since the target accuracy is known to increase with source accuracy (Figure 1), the target accuracy for 

M1 will be greater than that of M2, despite compa-rable conditional accuracies. 

(2) XLT Gap. Another standard measure of XLT progress is the difference between averaged source and target accuracies (XLT gap). This measure also suffers from the same issues as average target accuracy, as we show below. XLT gap ≜ ED,ℓ [S − Tℓ | M ]=

Z 10

(s − ED,ℓ [Tℓ | S = s, M ]) pS (s | M ) ds. 

Following the same argument outlined for the av-erage target accuracy, if we consider two mod-els M1, M 2 such that s − E[Tℓ | S = s, M 1] = 

s − E[Tℓ | S = s, M 2] but with higher source ac-curacy for M1, i.e., pS (s | M1) is tilted right. The XLT gap, given that the conditional gap s − E[Tℓ |

S = s, M ] varies with s, will show variations be-tween M1 and M2, despite their comparable condi-tional accuracies. 

(3) Transfer Score. The transfer score was pro-posed by Goldman et al. (2025) to quantify the proportion of target questions answered correctly among questions that were answered correctly in the source language. We express the score using our framework by deriving the fraction of examples correct in source and fraction correct in both source and target. For any given value of S = s and target language ℓ,the fraction of correct source responses is s, and the fraction of examples correct in both source and target is s × E[Tℓ | S = s, M ]. Integrating over the full spectrum of S, the theoretical transfer score 3(τℓ) is formulated as: 

τℓ ≜

R 10 pS (s | M )E[Tℓ | S = s, M ]s ds 

R 10 pS (s | M )s ds .τ = Eℓ[τℓ]

We illustrate the (erroneous) sensitivity of τℓ to source accuracy with an example. Consider a model with perfect transfer, i.e., E[Tℓ | S =

s, M ] = s, ∀s ∈ [0 , 1] . Depending on the dis-tribution pS (s), the τℓ value can vary between 2/3

for uniformly distributed pS (s) and 1 when source accuracy is near perfect. We propose a new XLT metric called the Hard-ness Adjusted Transfer Score (HAT Score) , that captures XLT accurately and without confounders. 

4.1 Transfer Profile and HAT Score Transfer Profile. A handy graphic is to plot the expected target accuracy: ED,ℓ [Tℓ | S = s, M ] on the Y-axis and source accuracy s on the X-axis. We refer to the regression curve defined by ( s, E[Tℓ |

S = s, M ]) as the transfer profile. If the model has perfect transfer, then the transfer profile aligns with the y = x line. If the transfer profile for model 

M1 falls strictly below that of model M2, we may claim better transfer for model M2.

HAT Score. We propose to replace p(s) in Equa-tion (1) with a uniform distribution and define our new metric as the normalized expected target accu-racy shown below. HAT Score = 2 

Z 10

ED,ℓ [Tℓ | S = s, M ] ds (2) The multiplier two ensures that the HAT score is bounded in the range [0 , 1] and is comparable to other metrics. 

Empirical Estimation of HAT score. HAT score computation, unlike standard measures, requires an estimate for the conditional: E[Tℓ | S, M ]. For any given example x(i) from the dataset, we denote the instantiation of the same prompt in source and tar-get languages as x(i) 

> s

, x (i) 

> ℓ

, respectively, along with their corresponding ground-truth outputs y(i) 

> s

, y (i) 

> ℓ

.We approximate S and Tℓ for a given example with pass-rates across N = 10 promptings of model 

M with their corresponding prompts x(i) 

> s

, x (i) 

> ℓ

. We fit a linear regressor on all the estimated values of 

(S, T ℓ) in order to approximate E[Tℓ | S, M ]. We use a linear regressor for fitting Tℓ from S because (a) it works reasonably well, with the goodness of fit ( R2) typically being above 0.6 (some exam-ple plots are shown in Appendix A.4) and, (b) it is a low-variance linear estimator that can handle sparse observations better. We further impose a constraint on the estimator that when source lan-guage performance hits the minimum value of zero, i.e., S = 0 , then T must follow suite, i.e., Tℓ = 0 .The estimation procedure is summarized below.                        

> 
> (x(i)
> s, y (i)
> s),(x(i)
> ℓ, y (i)
> ℓ)
> 
> ∼Ds(i)=
> NX
> n=1
> J(M(x(i)
> s)n, y (i)
> s)
> Nt(i)=Eℓ
> "NX
> n=1
> J(M(x(i)
> ℓ)n, y (i)
> ℓ)
> N
> #
> ˆm= arg min
> m
> X
> i
> 
> t(i)−ms (i)2
> (3) HAT Score = 2
> Z10
> ˆms ds = ˆ m(4)

where M denotes the model, J denotes the judge evaluator we use, and M (x)n denotes the model’s response for the nth pass of input x.1

5 Experimental Details 

5.1 Models 

We evaluate 20 models spanning five families: 

Gemini (Comanici et al., 2025; Google Deep-Mind, 2025a) (5), Gemma (Team et al., 2025; Google DeepMind, 2026b) (8), Qwen (2) (Yang et al., 2025), GPT-OSS (2) (OpenAI et al., 2025), and Claude (Anthropic, 2025) (3), to ensure our findings generalize across architectures, scales, and access paradigms (open-weight vs. proprietary API). The Gemma-3 series (1B, 4B, 12B, 27B) pro-vides a dense scaling ladder for studying how XLT evolves with model size within a single architecture. 

Gemma-4 extends this with both dense (E2B, E4B, 31B) and mixture-of-experts (26B-A4B) variants. 

Gemini-3-Flash is evaluated at three reasoning depths (default, low, minimal) to isolate the ef-fect of thinking budget on XLT. The Claude family (Haiku 4.5 , Sonnet 4.6 , Opus 4.7 ) and GPT-OSS 

(20B, 120B) provide further independent scaling axes along model size and thinking budget. Our model selection also spans old-to-new timelines between 2024 to the latest 2026 Gemma-4 release. 

> 1For the linear fit, we used the standard numpy library in Python (Harris et al., 2020).

45.2 Datasets 

We evaluate on three multilingual benchmarks, each targeting a distinct capability: ECLeKTic (cross-lingual factoid QA) (Goldman et al., 2025), MGSMv2 (multilingual math reasoning), and MMLU-ProX-Lite (multilingual multiple-choice probing conceptual knowledge and requires rea-soning) (Xuan et al., 2025). The original MGSM benchmark (Shi et al., 2022) is known to contain translation and validation-related artifacts, chal-lenging the accurate estimation of cross-lingual gaps. Peter et al. (2025) released a version fixing many issues with MGSM, which we use for our evaluation and refer to as MGSMv2. 

Source and Target Definitions for MGSMv2, MMLU-ProX-Lite. For both MGSMv2 and MMLU-ProX-Lite, we consider English as the source language and the target split comprises all available non-English languages in the dataset. De-spite no clean train-test separation with LLMs, we believe English as source language is justified given the dominance of reasoning and/or conceptual knowledge focus in these two datasets. MGSMv2 contains ten non-English languages while MMLU-ProX-Lite contains twenty eight. Please see Ap-pendix A.1 for the full list. 

Source and Target for ECLeKTic. Source-target separation is more clearly specified in ECLeKTic. The dataset collects questions from Wikipedia pages that are only available in one lan-guage. For each factual question, the source is the language of the original Wikipedia article while target comprises human-verified translations of the question and response into eleven other languages. 

5.3 Experimental Setup Response Validation. Multiple choice questions in MMLU-ProX-Lite can be validated with an exact match. On the other hand, ECLeKTic and MGSMv2 require an LLM-based judge (Gu et al., 2025) for validation. We mark re-sponses via majority voting with a model ensem-ble: Gemini-3-Flash (Low) , GPT-OSS-20B , and 

Claude-Sonnet-4.6 . For response validation, we prompt the judge model with the question, response and correct answer; this is a much simpler task than answering the original question. We employed an ensemble of judge models instead of one to sup-press any self-preferential bias. We provide com-plete details of the evaluation protocol, including the answer extraction and answer scoring prompts in Appendix A.1. 

Inference Related Parameters. When validat-ing different models, we retain a common tempera-ture (0.7) for all. We also retain the default thinking budget (unless explicitly specified) and sampling strategy. We provide dataset statistics and further experimental details in Appendix A.1. 

5.4 Statistical Significance 

All metrics are accompanied by 95% confi-dence intervals estimated using the bootstrap method (Efron, 1979). We resample with replace-ment 1000 times from the observations to estimate the distribution of the aggregated measure, which yields their mean and confidence interval. Large increase in Target 

> Accuracy but HAT Transfer
> Profile remains similar
> Target Accuracy
> ECLeKTic
> Source Accuracy

(a) Target accuracy indicates progress despite over-lapping transfer profiles. HAT score remains un-changed, thereby better representing progress. `XLT Gap' increases from 

> Gemma-3 1B -> Gemma-3 27B
> while HAT Transfer Profile
> shows improved transfer
> Source Accuracy
> Target Accuracy
> MMLU-ProX-Lite

(b) XLT gap falsely indicates worsening transfer al-though there is a clear improvement in the transfer profile. 

Figure 2: Improvements in source accuracy inflate traditional metrics like average target accuracy (a) and XLT gap (b) . Please refer to Section 6.1 for more details. 

56 Results 

We present comprehensive cross-lingual evalua-tion results in Tables 12 (ECLeKTic), 13 (MMLU-ProX-Lite) and 14 (MGSMv2) of Section A.2 in Appendix. We establish the reliability of HAT score in Section 6.1. We then utilize HAT score to address interesting questions related to progress. We track the improvements on XLT with model size in Section 6.2, over time in Section 6.3, and con-clude with an overall comparison across all models in Section 6.4. 

6.1 HAT Score Reliability ECLeKTic 

> HAT Score
> Target Accuracy
> (a) ECLeKTic: Target accuracy inflates while true transfer (HAT) plateaus. HAT Score
> MMLU-ProX-Lite
> XLT Gap
> (b) MMLU-ProX-Lite: XLT gap falsely implies re-gression as models scale.

Figure 3: Scaling ladder with HAT score. Traditional metrics distort XLT progress with model size: (a) tar-get accuracy falsely inflates on ECLeKTic, and (b) the XLT gap falsely shows regression on MMLU-ProX-Lite. The HAT score corrects the confounders, reveal-ing that actual transfer progress is much more gradual (Section 6.2). 

In Figure 2, we present two comparisons be-tween different pairs of models. In each of the plots, we show the transfer profile E[T | S] for both the models. At the bottom of each plot, we show frequency histograms of source accuracies. 

HAT Score is Preferable over Target Accuracy. 

In Figure 2 (a), we contrast GPT-OSS 20B with 

GPT-OSS 120B on ECLeKTic. Target accuracy for the 120B model (25.4%) is significantly larger than that of 20B model (18.0%) despite overlap-ping transfer profiles, i.e., no improvement in XLT .The increase in target accuracy with 120B is due to right-shifted source accuracies as visualized by the frequency histogram. HAT score for the two mod-els is close to 0.82, thus indicating no improvement in transfer. 

HAT Score is Preferable over Transfer Score. 

In the same Figure 2a, transfer score unlike HAT score showed a significant jump from 53.5 to 61 be-tween GPT-OSS models despite overlapping trans-fer profiles. We contrast transfer and HAT Scores for various models on ECLeKTic in Table 18 of Appendix A.7, where we discuss more differences in detail. 

HAT Score is Preferable over XLT gap. Fig-ure 2 (b) contrasts the Gemma-3-1B model with the 

Gemma-3-27B model on MMLU-ProX-Lite. The 27B model clearly improves over the 1B model, which is apparent from its steeper slope. However, the XLT gap increases from 2.7% for the 1B model to 6.4% for the 27B model, falsely indicating wors-ened XLT. The HAT score, which represents the area under the transfer profile, correctly captures this progress with increasing from 58.4 to 77.2. In all the examples above, HAT score is robust to the shifting frequency histogram of source ac-curacies. Overall, HAT score is a more reliable indicator of XLT progress. 

6.2 XLT Progress with Model Size Scaling 

We compare progress with model size among mod-els that belong to the same family to control for any unrelated changes to training recipes. Figure 3 com-pares across the Gemma-3 class of models. Progress indicated by HAT score in contrast to target accu-racy is much slower. This seemingly slow progress is in part because cross-lingual transfer in the small-est model is not as bad as indicated by target ac-curacy. Nevertheless, we continue to see some progress with model size. This observation aligns with the general trend of improved generalization with larger models (Zhang et al., 2016). 

XLT in Small Models. Our validation includes some relatively small-sized models in the range of 1B to 4B size: Gemma-3-1B, Gemma-3-4B, Qwen-3-4B, Gemma-4-E2B . We observe from Fig-ures 3, 5 that language transfer is not broken at very small scales. The HAT score for the four models on the three datasets is in the 50-80 range meaning the 6MGSMv2 

> Source Accuracy
> Target Accuracy MMLU-ProX-Lite
> Source Accuracy
> Target Accuracy ECLeKTic
> Source Accuracy
> Target Accuracy

Figure 4: Pair-of-lines fit for accuracy observations of Figure 1, obtained using Algorithm 1. For both MGSMv2, MMLU-ProX-Lite, newer models shift to a separate, tighter linear regime. Moreover for the two benchmarks, the median HAT score of recent models exceeds that of older models, showing a clear progress of cross-lingual reasoning transfer over time (Section 6.3). 

target accuracy is 50-80% of the source accuracy. Target accuracy, on the other hand, as shown in Figure 3 provides an overly pessimistic estimate for small models. 

6.3 XLT Progress over Time 

Assuming we made progress with time, we expect significant deviations to our accuracy-on-the-line observation of Figure 1. All the new models, if they are remarkably better than the old, must fall closer to the perfect transfer line while deviating from the transfer profile of older models. If that were the case, we expect to see a pair of lines fitting the accuracy observations better than a single line, and a clear separation between old and new models falling on two lines. Our analysis is inspired from Dominguez-Olmedo et al. (2025). We sort models by their knowledge cutoff date and group models into old and new for various possible dates. Moreover, progress need not percolate uniformly across new models, so we must allow a subset of new models falling in line with old models. We employ a la-tent binary variable indicating if a new model must be placed in line with old or new models. For a given cut-off date, we optimize the latent variable assignment for all new models with a combinato-rial subset search algorithm to minimize the overall mean-squared error. Finally, we fit two lines for (a) selected new models, (b) unselected new model and old models. Please refer to Appendix A.3 for more details. We declare progress if the accuracy line for (a subset of) newer models is closer to perfect transfer and their median HAT score is significantly better than that of old models. The pair-of-lines fit for all the datasets is shown in Figure 4. We observe a significant improve-ment with time for both MGSMv2 and MMLU-ProX-Lite. The median hat scores for MGSMv2 (0.90 →0.97) and MMLU-ProX-Lite (0.75 →0.93) show significant improvement with time. The near-perfect HAT score for new models for MGSMv2, MMLU-ProX-Lite indicate they are nearly solved. However, we do not see such a trend with ECLeK-Tic that needs to be examined further. 

6.4 Overall Comparison 

The full chart of HAT scores across all models and all datasets shown in Figure 5 reveals Gemini-3-Flash (with default thinking level) as the clear winner of cross-lingual transfer. Despite its multi-lingual emphasis, neither Gemma-3 nor Gemma-4 fared better. Across Gemma models of comparable size — 

Gemma-3-27B and Gemma-4-26B-A4B — the HAT score over all datasets is comparable. However, across models of comparable size but different model families — GPT-OSS-20B , Gemma-4-31B 

and Qwen-30B-A3B — we do not see comparable differences in HAT scores. This trend across model families indicates that pretraining recipes are likely more important for HAT score than model size. 

6.5 Transfer Between Shared and Different Scripts 

Is transfer across languages with a shared script better? Recall that HAT score quantifies trans-fer between source and any subset of target lan-guages. We split the target languages into two non-overlapping subsets based on whether they share the script with source. Transfer between languages with script differences is commonly understood 72.5-Flash 

> 2.5-Flash (Thinking Off)
> 3-Flash
> 3-Flash (Low)
> 3-Flash (Minimal)
> Gemma-3-1B
> Gemma-3-4B
> Gemma-3-12B
> Gemma-3-27B
> Gemma-4-E2B
> Gemma-4-E4B
> Gemma-4-26B-A4B
> Gemma-4-31B
> Qwen-3-4B
> Qwen-3-30B-A3B
> GPT-20B
> GPT-120B
> Haiku-4.5
> Sonnet-4.6
> Opus-4.7 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> HAT Score
> ECLeKTic
> 2.5-Flash
> 2.5-Flash (Thinking Off)
> 3-Flash
> 3-Flash (Low)
> 3-Flash (Minimal)
> Gemma-3-1B
> Gemma-3-4B
> Gemma-3-12B
> Gemma-3-27B
> Gemma-4-E2B
> Gemma-4-E4B
> Gemma-4-26B-A4B
> Gemma-4-31B
> Qwen-3-4B
> Qwen-3-30B-A3B
> GPT-20B
> GPT-120B
> Haiku-4.5
> Sonnet-4.6
> Opus-4.7
> MMLU-ProX-Lite
> 2.5-Flash
> 2.5-Flash (Thinking Off)
> 3-Flash
> 3-Flash (Low)
> 3-Flash (Minimal)
> Gemma-3-1B
> Gemma-3-4B
> Gemma-3-12B
> Gemma-3-27B
> Gemma-4-E2B
> Gemma-4-E4B
> Gemma-4-26B-A4B
> Gemma-4-31B
> Qwen-3-4B
> Qwen-3-30B-A3B
> GPT-20B
> GPT-120B
> Haiku-4.5
> Sonnet-4.6
> Opus-4.7
> MGSMv2

Figure 5: HAT scores for all models and all datasets. We observe transfer improvements with model size, thinking and model upgrades (Gemma3 →Gemma4, Gemini-2.5 →Gemini-3). Please see Section 6.4 for detailed description. 

to be weaker than that of transfer between shared script languages. Intuitively, using the same alpha-bet (like Latin) helps align words, while switching scripts (like Latin to Arabic or Cyrillic) adds a bar-rier. Table 1 breaks down the average HAT scores by script similarity.                               

> Dataset HAT Score Same Script HAT Score Different Script ∆(Delta)
> ECLeKTic 79 .1±10 .761 .7±14 .9+17 .4±7.4
> MGSMv2 89 .6±14 .089 .1±15 .3+0 .5±2.9
> MMLU-ProX-Lite 79 .0±12 .080 .9±12 .4−1.9±1.4

Table 1: XLT Progress based on script congruence be-tween source and target languages. We show the ag-gregated HAT Score across all models. Cross-script transfer is weak only in ECLeKTic. 

We observe a clear degradation in HAT scores moving from same to different scripts only on ECLeKTic, and not on the other two tasks. This could be because ECLeKTic requires recalling fac-tual knowledge and reconciling entities in any lan-guage with that of the source language, while the other two tasks MGSMv2 and MMLU-ProX-Lite only require conceptual reasoning. 

7 Discussion and Future Work 

In this work, we presented a reliable measure of cross-lingual transfer strength and used it to quan-tify the influence of various modeling choices on transfer. We further demonstrated that modern LLMs have made remarkable progress on the two reasoning-heavy datasets, MGSMv2 and MMLU-ProX-Lite, while progress on ECLeKTic is stalled. While we propose HAT as a more principled metric for evaluating XLT progress across different mod-els, traditional metrics remain valuable in settings, where source performance is held constant, such as comparing performance across target languages within the same model. We hope that our metric and insights help tease out factors that positively influence transfer and further catalyze research on cross-lingual transfer. 

Role of Thinking. Comparison between Gemini-2.5-Flash and Gemini-3-Flash model with and without thinking in Figure 5 indicates that think-ing helps improve XLT on all benchmarks includ-ing ECLeKTic. When the prompts are short and the source is English, we may intuitively reason that the model can translate the prompts to English and then respond, effectively bridging the cross-lingual gap. However, we did not observe any explicit be-havior of translating the whole prompt to English and then responding. We noted longer thinking in non-English indi-cating that some thinking tokens were allocated for language bridging. Empirical observations with Gemini models suggest 5% additional thinking length for prompts in target language on MGSMv2 and about 15-20% on most other settings (Ap-pendix A.8). Transfer scores must ideally quan-tify parity on (test-)compute normalized accuracies between source and target languages because finan-cial cost also influences technology access. 

Call for Action. MGSMv2 and MMLU-ProX-Lite are popular and are nearly solved after Jan-uary 2025 (Section 6.3). Search-off factual recall such as ECLeKTic is of less practical significance because search is easily available. Besides, the usage pattern of models have evolved from these standard datasets but the progress on multilingual 8benchmarks has been slow. This calls for more challenging and practically motivated benchmarks (e.g., τ -bench (Yao et al., 2025)) that go beyond single-step evaluations, where we are likely to see large gaps due to compounding cross-lingual errors from multiple sub-problems. 

8 Limitations. 

Data Contamination. HAT score, like any other measure, is not robust to data contamination and dataset errors. Newer models that closely trace the line of perfect transfer in Figure 4 could also indi-cate contamination without algorithmic enhance-ments. Thus, our metric and takeaways are not immune to conflating algorithmic progress with contamination (due to leakage and memorization) like with any other metric. 

Computational overhead. HAT score requires multiple evaluations of the prompt as shown in Equation block 4. We employed ten passes for all the results presented, which makes our metric ten times more expensive. 

9 Acknowledgment 

We would like to thank Ann Yuan for comments on our draft. We are grateful to Partha Talukdar, Markus Freitag, Vijai Mohan, Dan Deutsch, Ja-son Hickey, Jan-Thorsten Peter, Idan Brusilovsky, Matan Eyal, Katja Filippova, Laura Rimell, Mara Finkelstein, Jonas Adler, Paul Michel, Shubham Mittal, Het Shah, and Ashish Mittal for providing feedback and engaging in technical discussions on the topic. 

References 

Anthropic. 2025. Claude family. Accessed: May 21, 2026. Anthropic. n.d. Anthropic’s Transparency Hub. https: //www.anthropic.com/transparency . Accessed: 2026-05-25. Mikel Artetxe, Sebastian Ruder, and Dani Yogatama. 2020. On the cross-lingual transferability of mono-lingual representations. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , page 4623–4637. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Andrei Barbu, David Mayo, Julian Alverio, William Luo, Christopher Wang, Dan Gutfreund, Josh Tenen-baum, and Boris Katz. 2019. Objectnet: A large-scale bias-controlled dataset for pushing the limits of object recognition models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc. Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. 2010. A theory of learning from different domains. Mach. Learn. , 79(1–2):151–175. Zewen Chi, Li Dong, Furu Wei, Nan Yang, Sak-sham Singhal, Wenhui Wang, Xia Song, Xian-Ling Mao, Heyan Huang, and Ming Zhou. 2021. In-foxlm: An information-theoretic framework for cross-lingual language model pre-training. Preprint ,arXiv:2007.07834. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Training verifiers to solve math word prob-lems. Preprint , arXiv:2110.14168. Cohere Labs. 2024. The ai language gap. Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Mar-cel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, Luke Marris, Sam Petulla, Colin Gaffney, Asaf Aharoni, Nathan Lintz, Tiago Cardal Pais, Henrik Jacobs-son, Idan Szpektor, Nan-Jiang Jiang, and 3416 oth-ers. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities. Preprint ,arXiv:2507.06261. Ricardo Dominguez-Olmedo, Florian E. Dorner, and Moritz Hardt. 2025. Training on the test task confounds evaluation and emergence. Preprint ,arXiv:2407.07890. B. Efron. 1979. Bootstrap methods: Another look at the jackknife. The Annals of Statistics , 7(1):1–26. Omer Goldman, Uri Shaham, Dan Malkin, Sivan Eiger, Avinatan Hassidim, Yossi Matias, Joshua Maynez, Adi Mayrav Gilady, Jason Riesa, Shruti Rijhwani, Laura Rimell, Idan Szpektor, Reut Tsarfaty, and Matan Eyal. 2025. Eclektic: a novel challenge set for evaluation of cross-lingual knowledge transfer. 

Preprint , arXiv:2502.21228. Google. 2026a. Gemini 2.5 Flash. https: //ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/models/ gemini-2.5-flash . Google AI for Developers documentation. Knowledge cutoff: January 2025. Google. 2026b. Gemini 3 Developer Guide. https: //ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/gemini-3 .Google AI for Developers documentation. Knowl-edge cutoff: January 2025. Google DeepMind. 2025a. Gemini 3 [large language model]. Official Blog Release. 

9Google DeepMind. 2025b. Gemma 3 model card. https://ai.google.dev/gemma/docs/ core/model_card_3 . Google AI for Developers model card. Google DeepMind. 2026a. Gemma 4 model card. https://ai.google.dev/gemma/docs/ core/model_card_4 . Google AI for Developers model card. Training data cutoff: January 2025. Google DeepMind. 2026b. Gemma 4: Open models family. Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, Saizhuo Wang, Kun Zhang, Yuanzhuo Wang, Wen Gao, Lionel Ni, and Jian Guo. 2025. A survey on llm-as-a-judge. 

Preprint , arXiv:2411.15594. Lukas Haas, Gal Yona, Giovanni D’Antonio, Sasha Goldshtein, and Dipanjan Das. 2026. Simpleqa ver-ified: A reliable factuality benchmark to measure parametric knowledge. Preprint , arXiv:2509.07968. Wenhan Han, Yifan Zhang, Zhixun Chen, Binbin Liu, Haobin Lin, Bingni Zhang, Taifeng Wang, Mykola Pechenizkiy, Meng Fang, and Yin Zheng. 2025. Mubench: Assessment of multilingual capabilities of large language models across 61 languages. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.19468. Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J. van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David Cour-napeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti Picus, Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane, Jaime Fernández del Río, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, and 7 others. 2020. Array programming with NumPy. Nature , 585(7825):357– 362. Amey Hengle, Prasoon Bajpai, Soham Dan, and Tan-moy Chakraborty. 2024. Multilingual needle in a haystack: Investigating long-context behavior of multilingual large language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2408.10151. Finn Hillebrandt. 2026. Knowledge cutoff date: Def-inition & explanation. https://www.gradually. ai/en/ai-glossary/knowledge-cutoff-date/ .Gradually.ai. Junjie Hu, Sebastian Ruder, Aditya Siddhant, Gra-ham Neubig, Orhan Firat, and Melvin Johnson. 2020. Xtreme: A massively multilingual multi-task benchmark for evaluating cross-lingual generaliza-tion. Preprint , arXiv:2003.11080. Peng Hu, Sizhe Liu, Changjiang Gao, Xin Huang, Xue Han, Junlan Feng, Chao Deng, and Shu-jian Huang. 2025a. Large language models are cross-lingual knowledge-free reasoners. Preprint ,arXiv:2406.16655. Songbo Hu, Ivan Vuli´ c, and Anna Korhonen. 2025b. Quantifying language disparities in multilingual large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2508.17162. Maxim Ifergan, Leshem Choshen, Roee Aharoni, Idan Szpektor, and Omri Abend. 2024. Beneath the surface of consistency: Exploring cross-lingual knowledge representation sharing in llms. Preprint ,arXiv:2408.10646. Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, and Afshin Ros-tamizadeh. 2023. Domain adaptation: Learning bounds and algorithms. Preprint , arXiv:0902.3430. John Miller, Rohan Taori, Aditi Raghunathan, Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Vaishaal Shankar, Percy Liang, Yair Carmon, and Ludwig Schmidt. 2021. Ac-curacy on the line: On the strong correlation between out-of-distribution and in-distribution generalization. 

Preprint , arXiv:2107.04649. OpenAI, :, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Altman, Andy Applebaum, Edwin Arbus, Rahul K. Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, Boaz Barak, Ally Bennett, Tyler Bertao, Nivedita Brett, Eugene Brevdo, Greg Brockman, Sebastien Bubeck, and 5 others. 2025. gpt-oss-120b and gpt-oss-20b model card. Preprint , arXiv:2508.10925. Jan-Thorsten Peter, David Vilar, Tobias Domhan, Dan Malkin, and Markus Freitag. 2025. Mind the gap... or not? how translation errors and evalu-ation details skew multilingual results. Preprint ,arXiv:2511.05162. Fred Philippy, Siwen Guo, and Shohreh Haddadan. 2023. Towards a common understanding of con-tributing factors for cross-lingual transfer in multi-lingual language models: A review. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 5877–5891, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Vihari Piratla, Purvam Jain, Darshan Singh, Partha Talukdar, and Trevor Cohn. 2025. Rethinking cross-lingual gaps from a statistical viewpoint. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.15551. Telmo Pires, Eva Schlinger, and Dan Garrette. 2019. How multilingual is multilingual BERT? In Proceed-ings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 4996–5001, Flo-rence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Olawale Salaudeen and Moritz Hardt. 2025. Imagenot: A contrast with imagenet preserves model rankings. 

Preprint , arXiv:2404.02112. Freda Shi, Mirac Suzgun, Markus Freitag, Xuezhi Wang, Suraj Srivats, Soroush Vosoughi, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Sebastian Ruder, Denny Zhou, Dipanjan Das, and Jason Wei. 2022. Language models are multilingual chain-of-thought reasoners. Preprint ,arXiv:2210.03057. 

10 Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, Akshay Nathan, Alan Luo, Alec Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Aleksandr Efremov, Aleksandra Spyra, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Karpenko, and 467 others. 2026. Openai gpt-5 system card. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.03267. Tianyi Tang, Wenyang Luo, Haoyang Huang, Dong-dong Zhang, Xiaolei Wang, Xin Zhao, Furu Wei, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2024. Language-specific neurons: The key to multilingual capabilities in large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5701–5715, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Gemma Team, Aishwarya Kamath, Johan Ferret, Shreya Pathak, Nino Vieillard, Ramona Merhej, Sarah Perrin, Tatiana Matejovicova, Alexandre Ramé, Morgane Rivière, Louis Rouillard, Thomas Mesnard, Geoffrey Cideron, Jean bastien Grill, Sabela Ramos, Edouard Yvinec, Michelle Casbon, Etienne Pot, Ivo Penchev, and 197 others. 2025. Gemma 3 technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2503.19786. Hetong Wang, Pasquale Minervini, and Edoardo M. Ponti. 2024. Probing the emergence of cross-lingual alignment during llm training. Preprint ,arXiv:2406.13229. Koki Wataoka, Tsubasa Takahashi, and Ryokan Ri. 2025. Self-preference bias in llm-as-a-judge. 

Preprint , arXiv:2410.21819. Yuemei Xu, Ling Hu, Jiayi Zhao, Zihan Qiu, Kexin Xu, Yuqi Ye, and Hanwen Gu. 2025. A survey on multi-lingual large language models: corpora, alignment, and bias. Frontiers of Computer Science , 19(11). Weihao Xuan, Rui Yang, Heli Qi, Qingcheng Zeng, Yunze Xiao, Aosong Feng, Dairui Liu, Yun Xing, Jun-jue Wang, Fan Gao, Jinghui Lu, Yuang Jiang, Huitao Li, Xin Li, Kunyu Yu, Ruihai Dong, Shangding Gu, Yuekang Li, Xiaofei Xie, and 13 others. 2025. Mmlu-prox: A multilingual benchmark for ad-vanced large language model evaluation. Preprint ,arXiv:2503.10497. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Day-iheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, and 41 others. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2025. τ -bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. In In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Taejun Yun, Jinhyeon Kim, Deokyeong Kang, Seong Hoon Lim, Jihoon Kim, and Taeuk Kim. 2023. X-sns: Cross-lingual transfer prediction through sub-network similarity. Preprint , arXiv:2310.17166. Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. 2016. Understanding deep learning requires rethinking generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03530 .Yiran Zhao, Wenxuan Zhang, Guizhen Chen, Kenji Kawaguchi, and Lidong Bing. 2024. How do large language models handle multilingualism? Preprint ,arXiv:2402.18815. 

11 A Appendix 

A.1 Experimental Details 

We discuss dataset details in Section A.1.1, model details in Section A.1.2, evaluation related details in Section A.1.3. We acknowledge the use of AI tools (Gemini-3-Flash ) for providing layout-related creative inspiration for some of the visualizations in this work, including Figure 4 and Figure 5. 

A.1.1 Datasets 

We utilize a representative collection of datasets to study XLT from the perspective of both ‘knowledge transfer’ and ‘reasoning transfer’. The language coverage varies per dataset as shown in Table 2 with MGSMv2 spanning eleven languages, ECLeKTic spanning twelve and MMLU-ProX-Lite spanning twenty nine languages. We describe datasets in more detail below. We further present an example per dataset in Table 3 as a quick reference. We note that datasets utilized in our study are publicly available under open-source licenses that permit academic research and evaluation. • ECLeKTic: (Goldman et al., 2025) ECLeK-Tic measures cross-lingual knowledge transfer in LLMs through closed-book QA. The bench-mark tests if factual knowledge encoded in parameters transfers across languages. There-fore, the test requires prompting with web search turned off. • MGSMv2: (Peter et al., 2025; Shi et al., 2022) MGSM evaluates multilingual mathe-matical reasoning by manually translating 250 GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) grade-school math problems into ten typologically diverse languages. It is useful for XLT because it tests whether reasoning skills transfer beyond English, including relatively low-resource lan-guages such as Bengali, Swahili, and Telugu. Recent work reported (and corrected) transla-tion errors in MGSM (Peter et al., 2025). To avoid confounding our observations with such artifacts, we use the corrected version pro-posed in the same study. We call this version MGSMv2. • MMLU-ProX-Lite: (Xuan et al., 2025) MMLU-ProX extends MMLU-Pro to 29 lan-guages. MMLU-ProX-Lite probes reason-ing with conceptual knowledge and supports twenty nine languages. We adopt a lighter yet representative version: ‘MMLU-ProX-Lite’ containing 588 questions per language for ef-ficiency reasons. 

A.1.2 Models 

We evaluate our approach using a diverse suite of both open-source and closed-source frontier large language models. All models used in our exper-iments were accessed via Vertex AI on Google Cloud Pantheon. The complete list of evaluated models is as follows: • Gemini Family: Gemini-2.5-Flash (thinking), Gemini-2.5-Flash Thinking-Off (with think-ing turned off), Gemini-3-Flash (default/high thinking level), Gemini-3-Flash Low (with thinking level set to Low), Gemini-3-Flash Minimal (with thinking level set to minimal). • Gemma Family: Gemma-3-1B, Gemma-3-4B, Gemma-3-12B, Gemma-3-27B, Gemma-4-E2B-IT, Gemma-4-E4B-IT, Gemma-4-26B-A4B-IT, Gemma-4-31B-IT. • Claude Family: Claude-Haiku-4.5, Claude-Sonnet-4.6, Claude-Opus-4.7. • Qwen Family: Qwen-3-4B, Qwen-3-30B-A3B. • GPT-OSS Family: GPT-OSS-20B, GPT-OSS-120B. 

A.1.3 Evaluation Protocol Prompt templates. We use the prompt templates shown in Table 4 for formatting each example’s prompt. All the models were zero-shot prompted. 

Answer extraction. MMLU-ProX-Lite: We use a regular expression and exact matching to extract and validate the model’s response. MGSMv2, ECLeKTic: Since the responses for these datasets are free-form, we pass the entire raw response from model to LLM-as-judge for valida-tion, which we describe next. 

LLM-as-Judge Validator. In order to verify free-form model responses, we pass the model’s re-sponse along with the ground-truth answer to an LLM-judge. Since LLM-judge models have a tendency to mark model responses from the same family as correct (Wataoka et al., 2025), we take the majority voted response from three judge models spanning three model families: 

Gemini-3-Flash (Low Thinking), GPT-OSS 20B 

and Claude-Sonnet-4.6 .12 Dataset Languages represented. MGSMv2 English, Bengali, Chinese, French, German, Japanese, Russian, Spanish, Swahili, Telugu, Thai.   

> ECLeKTic English, Chinese, French, German, Hebrew, Hindi, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish.
> MMLU-ProX-Lite English, Afrikaans, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, Czech, French, German, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Marathi, Nepali, Portuguese, Russian, Serbian, Spanish, Swahili, Telugu, Thai, Ukrainian, Urdu, Vietnamese, Wolof, Yoruba, Zulu.

Table 2: Languages coverage per dataset. These datasets span between eleven to twenty nine languages. 

Benchmark Capability Example Question Expected Answer 

ECLeKTic 

> (Source = Any language (Here: de)

Factual knowledge In welchem Land befand sich AFN Bremerhaven? 

Deutschland 

MGSMv2 

> (Source = en)

Math reasoning Janet’s ducks lay 16 eggs per day. She eats three for breakfast every morning and bakes muffins for her friends every day with four. She sells every duck egg at the farmers’ market daily for $2. How much in dollars does she make every day at the farmers’ market? 

18 

MMLU-ProX-Lite 

> (Source = en)

Broad academic knowledge (MCQ)      

> The presence of two or more cell lines from different zygotes in a single individual is known as: Options: A. heterozygosity B. triploidy C. mosaicism D. monosomy E. chimaerism F. polyzygosity G. diploidy H. aneuploidy I. autopolyploidy J. polyploidy

E

Table 3: Example questions from each evaluation dataset. 

Prompt formatting for judge models. Figures 6 and 7 show the judge prompts used for ECLeK-Tic and MGSMv2, respectively. For ECLeK-Tic, we re-use the prompt template for factuality queries from Haas et al. (2026). In the original study proposing MGSMv2 (Peter et al., 2025), the authors provide a regex-based + exact-matching regime for answer extraction and evaluation. Our initial experiments on MGSMv2 with 20 different models revealed some false positives where the trailing number in the model response was not the intended prediction for the expected answer. This prompted us to use an LLM-as-a-Judge verifier for MGSMv2. 

Reliability of LLM-as-a-judge models. We par-tially validate LLM-as-a-judge responses to help understand their reliability. ECLeKTic contains about 20% questions that ask about the date of an event (e.g., When was Kreeda Bharati estab-lished? ), which we refer to as Year-ECLeKTic. We can extract and validate responses on Year-ECLeKTic without using an LLM. In Table 5, we show the agreement between LLM-as-a-judge deci-sions and ground-truth. We observe >99.9% agree-ment with ground-truth, which reinforces our belief in the reliability of the judge ensemble. 

A.2 Evaluations 

In this section, we present comprehensive evalua-tion results across all models and model families used in our work. Tables 12, 13, and 14 detail the complete metric information, including the ex-pected target accuracy, the cross-lingual transfer (XLT) gap, and our proposed HAT score, along with their respective 95% confidence intervals for the ECLeKTic, MMLU-ProX-Lite, and MGSMv2 datasets. 13 Dataset Prompt Template  

> ECLeKTic

You are a helpful assistant. Please answer the following question. Provide only the answer. Do not include any explanations or additional text. Question: {question} Answer:  

> MGSMv2

You are a helpful assistant. Please answer the following question. Question: {question} Answer:  

> MMLU-ProX-Lite

Answer the following multiple choice question. Reply with ONLY the letter of the correct option (e.g. A, B, C, ...). Do not include any other text. Question:{question} Options:{options_str} Answer: 

Table 4: Prompt formatting templates employed for different datasets. 

Split Exact-Match Accuracy (%) LLM-as-a-Judge Accuracy (%) Agreement Source 31.4 31.4 100.00% Target 23.1 23.2 99.94% Overall 23.8 23.9 99.95% 

Table 5: Comparison of Exact-Match and LLM-as-a-Judge accuracies. The near-perfect agreement (>99.9%) demonstrates the high reliability of our LLM-based evaluation protocol. 

Algorithm 1 Two-Stage Method for Model Clustering 

Require: Set of models M , cutoff date Dc, scores S = {(si, t i)}|M |

> i=1

Ensure: Optimized clusters C∗

> old

, C∗

> new

Stage I: Temporal Initialization  

> 1:

Cold ← { m ∈ M | release (m) < D c} 

> 2:

Cbase_new ← { m ∈ M | release (m) ≥ Dc}

Stage II: MSE Minimization  

> 3:

min_MSE ← ∞  

> 4:

for each subset S′ ⊆ Cbase_new where |S′| ≥ 3 do  

> 5:

Ccandidate_new ← S′ 

> 6:

Ccandidate_old ← Cold ∪ (Cbase_new \ S′) 

> 7:

WMSE total ← P

> C∈{ Ccandidate_old ,C candidate_new }

|C| · MSE (LinearFit (C))  

> 8:

if WMSE total < min_MSE then  

> 9:

min_MSE ← WMSE total  

> 10:

C∗

> old

, C ∗ 

> new

← Ccandidate_old , C candidate_new  

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

return C∗

> old

, C ∗

> new

14 Your job is to look at a question, a gold target, and a predicted answer, and then assign a grade of either ["CORRECT", "INCORRECT", "NOT_ATTEMPTED"]. First, I will give examples of each grade, and then you will grade a new example. The following are examples of CORRECT predicted answers. ‘‘‘ Question: What are the names of Barack Obama’s children? Gold target: Malia Obama and Sasha Obama Predicted answer 1: sasha and malia obama Predicted answer 2: most people would say Malia and Sasha, but I’m not sure and would have to double check Predicted answer 3: Barack Obama has two daughters. Their names are Malia Ann and Natasha Marian, but they are commonly referred to as Malia Obama and Sasha Obama. Malia was born on July 4, 1998, and Sasha was born on June 10, 2001. ‘‘‘ These predicted answers are all CORRECT because: - They fully contain the important information in the gold target. - They do not contain any information that contradicts the gold target. - Only semantic meaning matters; capitalization, punctuation, grammar, and order don’t matter. - Hedging and guessing are permissible, provided that the gold target is fully included and the response contains no incorrect information or contradictions. The following are examples of INCORRECT predicted answers. ‘‘‘ Question: What are the names of Barack Obama’s children? Gold target: Malia and Sasha Predicted answer 1: Malia. Predicted answer 2: Malia, Sasha, and Susan. Predicted answer 3: Barack Obama does not have any children. Predicted answer 4: I think it’s either Malia and Sasha. Or it could be Malia and Jackie. Or it could be Joey and Malia. Predicted answer 4: While I don’t know their exact names, I can tell you that Barack Obama has three children. Predicted answer 5: It’s possible you may mean Betsy and Olivia. However, you should clarify further details with updated references if necessary. Is that the correct answer? Predicted answer 6: It may be the case that Obama’s child is named James. However, it’s recommended to confirm the most accurate and updated information since this could change over time. This model may not always reflect the most current information. ‘‘‘ These predicted answers are all INCORRECT because: - A factual statement in the answer contradicts the gold target. Incorrect statements that have some hedging (e.g., "it is possible that", "although i’m not sure, i think") are also considered incorrect. The following are examples of NOT_ATTEMPTED predicted answers. ‘‘‘ Question: What are the names of Barack Obama’s children? Gold target: Malia and Sasha Predicted answer 1: I don’t know. Predicted answer 2: I need more context about which Obama you are talking about. Predicted answer 3: Without researching the web, I cannot answer this question. However, I can tell you that Barack Obama has two children. Predicted answer 4: Barack Obama has two children. I know that one of them is Malia, but I’m not sure about the other one. ‘‘‘ These predicted answers are all NOT_ATTEMPTED because: - The important information in the gold target is not included in the answer. - No statements in the answer contradict the gold target. Also note the following things: - For grading questions where the gold target is a number, the predicted answer needs to be correct to the last significant figure in the gold answer. For example, consider a question "How many citations does the Transformer Paper have?" with gold target "120k". - Predicted answers "120k", "124k", and 115k" are all CORRECT. - Predicted answers "100k" and "113k" are INCORRECT. - Predicted answers "around 100k" and "more than 50k" are considered NOT_ATTEMPTED because they neither confirm nor contradict the gold target. - The gold target may contain more information than the question. In such cases, the predicted answer only needs to contain the information that is in the question. - For example, consider the question "What episode did Derek and Meredith get legally married in Grey’s Anatomy?" with gold target "Season 7, Episode 20: White Wedding". Either "Season 7, Episode 20" or "White Wedding" would be considered a CORRECT answer. - Do not punish predicted answers if they omit information that would be clearly inferred from the question. - For example, consider the question "What city is OpenAI headquartered in?" and the gold target "San Francisco, California". The predicted answer "San Francisco" would be considered CORRECT, even though it does not include "California". - Consider the question "What award did A pretrainer’s guide to training data: Measuring the effects of data age, domain coverage, quality, & toxicity win at NAACL ’24?", the gold target is "Outstanding Paper Award". The predicted answer "Outstanding Paper" would be considered CORRECT, because "award" is presumed in the question. - For the question "What is the height of Jason Wei in meters?", the gold target is "1.73 m". The predicted answer "1.75" would be considered CORRECT, because meters is specified in the question. - For the question "What is the name of Barack Obama’s wife?", the gold target is "Michelle Obama". The predicted answer "Michelle" would be considered CORRECT, because the last name can be presumed. - Do not punish for typos in people’s name if it’s clearly the same name. - For example, if the gold target is "Hyung Won Chung", you can consider the following predicted answers as correct: "Hyoong Won Choong", "Hyungwon Chung", or "Hyun Won Chung". Here is a new example. Simply reply with either CORRECT, INCORRECT, NOT ATTEMPTED. Don’t apologize or correct yourself if there was a mistake; we are just trying to grade the answer. ‘‘‘ Question: {question} Gold target: {target} Predicted answer: {predicted_answer} ‘‘‘ Grade the predicted answer of this new question as one of: A: CORRECT B: INCORRECT C: NOT_ATTEMPTED Just return the letters "A", "B", or "C", with no text around it. 

Figure 6: Prompt template used for the LLM-as-a-judge evaluator for ECLeKTic. 

15 Judge whether the following ‘response‘ to ‘question‘ is correct or not based on the precise and unambiguous ‘correct_answer‘ below. <question> {question} </question> <response> {predicted_answer} </response> <correct_answer> {target} </correct_answer> The correct answer is always a number. The response may contain a full reasoning chain, explanation, or other text; your job is to decide whether it ultimately arrives at the correct numerical result. Your judgement must follow the format and criteria below: <extracted_final_answer> The final numeric answer extracted from the ‘response‘. Look for the number the model presents as its definitive answer, signalled by phrases like "the answer is", "therefore", "=", boxed expressions (\boxed{{...}}), or a concluding statement. Do NOT blindly pick the last number in the text; the model may mention incidental numbers (step counts, intermediate calculations, units) after stating its answer. Put ’None’ if there is no extractable numeric answer. </extracted_final_answer> <reasoning> Explain why the extracted_final_answer is correct or incorrect based on ‘correct_answer‘. Focus only on whether the numerical values match. Ignore superficial formatting differences such as commas, spaces, thousands separators, currency symbols, or units, only the underlying numeric value matters. Do not attempt to re-solve the problem. </reasoning> <correct> Answer ’yes’ if the extracted_final_answer matches the ‘correct_answer‘, or is within a small margin of error for numerical problems. Answer ’no’ otherwise, i.e. if the number differs, no number was found, or the model refused to answer. </correct> """ 

Figure 7: Prompt template used for the LLM-as-a-judge evaluator for MGSMv2. 

A.3 Dual Fits 

We present further technical details that support our analysis in Section 6.3. To measure progress over time, we intend to categorize models into old and new. We picked a cutoff date of January 2025 

because it divided the considered models in almost two halves as shown in Table 6. We further assume that not all new models are equally capable, which may happen because con-temporary research knowledge is not openly shared across all model makers. We allow for a small sub-set of new models to be merged with old models. We then fit a separate regression line for old (and any subset of new models) and (remaining) new models. We pick the subset of new models that must be merged with old models such that the over-all MSE is minimized. Since the number of new models is small (of the order of ten), we simply iterate over all subsets of new models. Our overall estimation procedure is sketched in Algorithm 1. Table 7 lays out the final split between models for MMLU-ProX-Lite. 

A.4 Why is a linear estimator a good choice? 

As described in Section 4.1 and Equation 4, we fit a linear regressor to approximate source accuracy (S) with target accuracy in any language ℓ: Tℓ. In this section, we justify why the linear estimator is a reasonable choice. In Figure 8, we plot source accuracy ( S) against averaged target accuracy for two models: G EMINI -2.5-F LASH (top) and G EMINI -3-F LASH (bottom). We observe that the coefficient of determination (R2) is over 0.6. Although a linear fit is not perfect, it is desirable owing to low-variance estimation. Table 8 summarizes ordered statistics of R2 val-ues over different models. The median R2 ranges from 0.46 MGSMv2 to 0.74 ECLeKTic, and the 75th percentile exceeds 0.59 on all three datasets. Negative R2 values arise when a model achieves near-perfect source-language accuracy, leaving in-sufficient variance for regression ( Gemini-3 mod-els score above 95% on nearly all MGSMv2 source questions). Outside such cases, the linear prior be-tween source and target accuracy is well supported. 

A.5 Accuracy on the Line for all target languages. 

In this section, we validate if the accuracy-on-the-line phenomena discussed in Section 3 and Figure 1 holds true for individual languages (especially low-resource languages). If we observe weak corre-lation between source and any specific target lan-guages, it may indicate general progress leaving some languages behind. In this section, we report accuracy of source versus specific target languages 16 Model Identifier Month Year                                             

> Cohort 1: <01-2025 Cutoff Date ( △)
> GPT-OSS-20B 06 2024 GPT-OSS-120B 06 2024 GEMMA -3-1B 08 2024 GEMMA -3-4B 08 2024 GEMMA -3-12B 08 2024 GEMMA -3-27B 08 2024 QWEN -3-4B 211 2024 QWEN -3-30B-A3B 211 2024
> Cohort 2: ≥01-2025 Cutoff Date ( □)
> GEMINI -2.5-F LASH 01 2025 GEMINI -2.5-F LASH -T HINKING -O FF 01 2025 GEMINI -3-F LASH 01 2025 GEMINI -3-F LASH -L OW 01 2025 GEMINI -3-F LASH -M INIMAL 01 2025 GEMMA -4-E2B-IT 01 2025 GEMMA -4-E4B-IT 01 2025 GEMMA -4-26B-A4B-IT 01 2025 GEMMA -4-31B-IT 01 2025 CLAUDE -H AIKU -4.5 02 2025 CLAUDE -S ONNET -4.6 05 2025 CLAUDE -O PUS -4.7 01 2026

Table 6: Partitioning of the models. Models are strictly categorized into pre- and post-January 2025 ( 01-2025 )cohorts based on their documented knowledge cutoff dates (OpenAI et al., 2025; Google DeepMind, 2025b; Google, 2026a,b; Google DeepMind, 2026a; Anthropic, n.d.)]            

> Cluster Model Name
> Red (Fit 1) GEMMA -3-1B, GEMMA -3-4B, GEMMA -3-12B, GEMMA -3-27B, QWEN -3-4B-IT ,QWEN -3-30B-A3B-IT ,GPT-OSS-20B, GPT-OSS-120B, G EMINI -2.5-F LASH -T HINKING -O FF , G EMMA -4-E2B-IT, G EMMA -4-E4B-IT, C LAUDE -S ONNET -4.6, C LAUDE -O PUS -4.7 Blue (Fit 2) GEMINI -2.5-F LASH ,GEMINI -3-F LASH ,GEMINI -3-F LASH -L OW ,GEMINI -3-F LASH -M INIMAL , G EMMA -4-26B-A4B-IT, G EMMA -4-31B-IT, C LAUDE -H AIKU -4.5

Table 7: Model classification by cluster for MMLU-ProX-Lite, derived using Algorithm 1. Figure 4 (middle) shows the non-comparative aggregated HAT scores for the two clusters. 

across datasets, as opposed to source accuracy ver-sus averaged target accuracy reported in the main paper. We report source accuracy versus target accu-racy for each individual language for ECLeKTic in Table 9, MGSMv2 in Table 11, and MMLU-ProX-Lite in Table 10. While the results on ECLeK-Tic, MGSMv2 are for every available target lan-guage, we report on a subset of twelve random languages for MMLU-ProX-Lite. We observe that the accuracy-on-the-line phenomena strongly holds for any language. This empirical behavior con-firms that general performance improvements pre-dictably propagate performance gains into individ-ual target languages, providing strong empirical grounding for the instance-specific linear priors leveraged by our HAT score formulation in Sec-tion 4.1. We notice some exceptions to this obser-vation, specifically in Table 11 for Swahili, Telugu and Bengali. Referring to Section 6.3, this sep-arate trajectory is likely a result of targeted XLT 

Dataset P0 (Min) P25 P50 (Median) P75 P100 (Max) 

ECLeKTic −0.0843 0.5805 0.7445 0.8105 0.9323 MGSM2 −246.03 0.0957 0.4619 0.5965 0.9861 MMLU-ProX-Lite −1.5266 0.2330 0.6726 0.8131 0.9494 

Table 8: Ordered statistics of R2 values aggregated over different models. Target Accuracy Target Accuracy 

Source Accuracy 

Figure 8: Source accuracy (S) versus averaged target ac-curacy ( Eℓ[Tℓ]) on ECLeKTic for two models: G EMINI -2.5-F LASH (top) and G EMINI -3-F LASH (bottom). The plots also show the fitted line, which approximates the observations reasonably well. 

improvements in the newer models. 

> 2

Since Alibaba does not appear to disclose an official Qwen3 knowledge-cutoff date, we treat November 2024 as a reasonable approximation: a secondary knowledge-cutoff tracker (Hillebrandt, 2026) lists both Qwen3-235B-A22B and Qwen3-32B (from the same family) with a November 2024 cutoff. However, a pre 01/2025 cutoff is highly likely given that the original Qwen3 series was publicly released on April 29, 2025, and that assertion is all we need for our analysis. 

17 ECLeKTic Target Accuracy 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

de 

y=x 

de 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

en 

y=x 

en 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

es 

y=x 

es 

Best Linear Fit 

(a) German (de) (b) English (en) (c) Spanish (es) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

fr 

y=x 

fr 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

he 

y=x 

he 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

hi 

y=x 

hi 

Best Linear Fit 

(d) French (fr) (e) Hebrew (he) (f) Hindi (hi) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

id 

y=x 

id 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

it 

y=x 

it 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

ja 

y=x 

ja 

Best Linear Fit 

(g) Indonesian (id) (h) Italian (it) (i) Japanese (ja) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

ko 

y=x 

ko 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

pt 

y=x 

pt 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

zh 

y=x 

zh 

Best Linear Fit 

(j) Korean (ko) (k) Portuguese (pt) (l) Chinese (zh) 

Source Accuracy 

Table 9: Detailed language-by-language breakdown of target accuracy versus source accuracy curves across the ECLeKTic dataset. 

18 MMLU-ProX-Lite Target Accuracy 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

af 

y=x 

af 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

ar 

y=x 

ar 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

bn 

y=x 

bn 

Best Linear Fit 

(a) Afrikaans (af) (b) Arabic (ar) (c) Bengali (bn) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

es 

y=x 

es 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

hi 

y=x 

hi 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

id 

y=x 

id 

Best Linear Fit 

(d) Spanish (es) (e) Hindi (hi) (f) Indonesian (id) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

ja 

y=x 

ja 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

ko 

y=x 

ko 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

ru 

y=x 

ru 

Best Linear Fit 

(g) Japanese (ja) (h) Korean (ko) (i) Russian (ru) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

sw 

y=x 

sw 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

vi 

y=x 

vi 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

zh 

y=x 

zh 

Best Linear Fit 

(j) Swahili (sw) (k) Vietnamese (vi) (l) Chinese (zh) 

Source Accuracy 

Table 10: Detailed language-by-language breakdown of target accuracy versus source accuracy curves across the MMLU-ProX-Lite dataset. 

19 MGSMv2 Target Accuracy 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

bn 

y=x 

bn 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

de 

y=x 

de 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

es 

y=x 

es 

Best Linear Fit 

(a) Bengali (bn) (b) German (de) (c) Spanish (es) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

fr 

y=x 

fr 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

ja 

y=x 

ja 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

ru 

y=x 

ru 

Best Linear Fit 

(d) French (fr) (e) Japanese (ja) (f) Russian (ru) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

sw 

y=x 

sw 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

te 

y=x 

te 

Best Linear Fit 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

th 

y=x 

th 

Best Linear Fit 

(g) Swahili (sw) (h) Telugu (te) (i) Thai (th) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

zh 

y=x 

zh 

Best Linear Fit 

(j) Chinese (zh) 

Source Accuracy 

Table 11: Detailed language-by-language breakdown of target accuracy versus source accuracy curves across the MGSMv2 dataset. 

20 Model Target Accuracy (%) ( ↑) XLT Gap (%) ( ↓) HAT Score ( ↑)

Estimate 95% CI Estimate 95% CI Estimate 95% CI GEMINI -2.5-F LASH 44.5 [41.1, 48.1] 6.4 [4.3, 8.5] 81.7 [78.6, 84.7] GEMINI -2.5-F LASH 

THINKING -O FF 29.4 [26.5, 32.5] 13.3 [10.5, 16.3] 60.4 [55.9, 64.8] GEMINI -3-F LASH 60.5 [56.8, 64.3] 8.0 [5.6, 10.4] 84.6 [82.1, 87.1] GEMINI -3-F LASH LOW 60.2 [56.5, 64.0] 8.9 [6.5, 11.2] 84.0 [81.6, 86.7] GEMINI -3-F LASH MINIMAL 52.3 [48.9, 56.1] 13.4 [10.2, 16.3] 74.2 [70.9, 77.5] GEMMA -3-1B 4.6 [3.5, 6.0] 0.8 [-0.3, 2.2] 48.2 [34.9, 61.0] GEMMA -3-4B 9.6 [7.7, 11.8] 1.9 [0.3, 4.0] 56.4 [47.0, 65.9] GEMMA -3-12B 15.2 [12.8, 17.9] 2.1 [-0.2, 4.3] 64.1 [56.8, 71.4] GEMMA -3-27B 19.8 [17.2, 23.0] 6.5 [4.1, 8.9] 63.8 [58.4, 69.6] QWEN -3-4B 10.8 [8.9, 13.1] 2.9 [1.1, 5.1] 56.5 [47.8, 64.9] QWEN -3-30B-A3B 16.6 [14.1, 19.5] 2.8 [0.7, 5.1] 65.9 [59.7, 72.6] GPT-OSS-20B 18.0 [15.3, 21.2] 1.6 [0.2, 3.2] 80.1 [74.7, 85.3] GPT-OSS-120B 25.4 [22.4, 28.7] 2.4 [0.6, 4.1] 82.2 [77.9, 86.1] GEMMA -4-E2B-IT 9.0 [7.2, 11.0] 2.8 [0.9, 4.9] 51.8 [42.4, 61.3] GEMMA -4-E4B-IT 10.7 [8.7, 13.0] 5.0 [3.1, 6.8] 58.4 [51.2, 65.7] GEMMA -4-26B-A4B-IT 20.3 [17.4, 23.3] 5.7 [3.0, 8.3] 63.9 [57.9, 69.6] GEMMA -4-31B-IT 22.6 [19.5, 26.0] 5.5 [3.1, 8.0] 68.6 [62.9, 74.1] CLAUDE -H AIKU -4.5 20.8 [17.8, 23.9] 8.4 [5.9, 11.3] 59.8 [53.8, 65.7] CLAUDE -S ONNET -4.6 44.1 [40.2, 48.0] 8.7 [5.6, 11.5] 74.7 [70.9, 78.5] CLAUDE -O PUS -4.7 45.2 [41.6, 49.1] 10.3 [7.4, 13.5] 73.5 [69.7, 77.2] 

Table 12: Comprehensive evaluation results for ECLeKTic. Complete estimates and 95% confidence intervals for average target accuracy, XLT gap, and HAT score across all tested model configurations. 

Model Target Accuracy (%) ( ↑) XLT Gap (%) ( ↓) HAT Score ( ↑)

Estimate 95% CI Estimate 95% CI Estimate 95% CI GEMINI -2.5-F LASH 73.4 [73.3, 75.5] -1.9 [-3.4, -0.5] 97.5 [96.2, 98.8] GEMINI -2.5-F LASH 

THINKING -O FF 61.6 [60.1, 62.2] 5.9 [4.5, 7.4] 88.9 [87.1, 90.3] GEMINI -3-F LASH 82.1 [81.6, 82.6] -1.4 [-2.6, -0.3] 98.8 [97.8, 99.9] GEMINI -3-F LASH LOW 83.0 [82.5, 83.5] -0.8 [-2.0, 0.4] 98.3 [97.3, 99.3] GEMINI -3-F LASH MINIMAL 77.2 [76.6, 77.8] 3.2 [1.9, 4.6] 93.5 [92.1, 94.8] GEMMA -3-1B 14.2 [13.7, 14.7] 2.7 [0.8, 4.7] 58.4 [52.3, 64.1] GEMMA -3-4B 24.6 [23.9, 25.2] 3.6 [1.5, 5.6] 67.5 [63.1, 71.7] GEMMA -3-12B 34.9 [34.3, 35.6] 7.0 [4.7, 9.2] 71.6 [68.2, 74.7] GEMMA -3-27B 39.4 [38.6, 40.1] 6.4 [4.3, 8.2] 77.2 [74.4, 80.1] QWEN -3-4B 32.7 [32.0, 33.4] 8.1 [6.0, 10.3] 69.3 [65.8, 72.6] QWEN -3-30B-A3B 43.4 [42.7, 44.2] 10.5 [8.5, 12.4] 74.8 [71.9, 77.6] GPT-OSS-20B 66.3 [65.7, 66.9] 7.7 [6.5, 9.0] 88.9 [87.6, 90.3] GPT-OSS-120B 72.3 [71.8, 73.0] 6.6 [5.4, 8.0] 90.6 [89.2, 92.0] GEMMA -4-E2B-IT 26.1 [25.5, 26.7] 5.7 [3.2, 8.6] 59.3 [54.7, 63.5] GEMMA -4-E4B-IT 35.8 [35.2, 36.5] 7.1 [5.1, 9.0] 74.8 [71.6, 77.8] GEMMA -4-26B-A4B-IT 48.7 [48.0, 49.5] 4.8 [2.6, 7.2] 78.7 [76.2, 81.1] GEMMA -4-31B-IT 59.4 [58.6, 60.1] 4.8 [2.9, 6.8] 84.7 [82.5, 86.7] CLAUDE -H AIKU -4.5 44.6 [43.9, 45.3] 0.6 [-1.9, 3.1] 76.5 [73.5, 79.2] CLAUDE -S ONNET -4.6 59.5 [58.7, 60.2] 7.4 [5.7, 9.0] 85.4 [83.6, 87.3] CLAUDE -O PUS -4.7 76.7 [76.2, 77.5] 5.8 [3.8, 7.3] 89.3 [87.8, 90.9] 

Table 13: Comprehensive evaluation results for MMLU-ProX-Lite. Complete estimates and 95% confidence intervals for average target accuracy, XLT gap, and HAT score across all tested model configurations. 

21 Model Target Accuracy (%) ( ↑) XLT Gap (%) ( ↓) HAT Score ( ↑)

Estimate 95% CI Estimate 95% CI Estimate 95% CI GEMINI -2.5-F LASH 98.2 [97.7, 98.6] 1.3 [0.8, 1.9] 98.7 [98.1, 99.2] GEMINI -2.5-F LASH 

THINKING -O FF 55.6 [53.9, 57.5] 2.8 [-0.1, 5.4] 89.8 [86.9, 92.4] GEMINI -3-F LASH 99.3 [99.1, 99.6] 0.4 [0.1, 0.8] 99.6 [99.3, 99.9] GEMINI -3-F LASH LOW 99.4 [99.2, 99.6] 0.5 [0.2, 1.0] 99.5 [99.1, 99.8] GEMINI -3-F LASH MINIMAL 86.5 [85.4, 87.7] 0.4 [-1.8, 2.5] 96.2 [94.8, 97.5] GEMMA -3-1B 25.9 [24.6, 27.4] 24.7 [21.3, 28.3] 47.7 [43.7, 51.8] GEMMA -3-4B 72.9 [71.5, 74.3] 13.4 [10.8, 15.9] 82.6 [80.3, 85.0] GEMMA -3-12B 88.1 [87.1, 89.1] 7.9 [6.3, 9.7] 91.3 [89.7, 92.8] GEMMA -3-27B 93.3 [92.6, 94.1] 4.1 [2.7, 5.4] 95.3 [94.0, 96.5] QWEN -3-4B 79.4 [77.9, 80.8] 18.1 [16.2, 20.1] 81.3 [79.4, 83.2] QWEN -3-30B-A3B 88.6 [87.6, 89.6] 9.8 [8.2, 11.4] 89.8 [88.4, 91.3] GPT-OSS-20B 95.2 [94.6, 95.8] 3.8 [3.0, 4.6] 96.1 [95.4, 96.9] GPT-OSS-120B 97.0 [96.4, 97.5] 2.6 [2.0, 3.2] 97.4 [96.8, 98.0] GEMMA -4-E2B-IT 13.0 [11.9, 14.1] 5.0 [2.2, 8.0] 53.7 [45.1, 62.6] GEMMA -4-E4B-IT 17.5 [16.3, 18.8] 4.4 [2.3, 6.8] 68.0 [60.3, 74.1] GEMMA -4-26B-A4B-IT 96.5 [95.9, 97.1] 3.0 [1.9, 4.2] 96.8 [95.7, 97.7] GEMMA -4-31B-IT 98.3 [97.8, 98.6] 1.4 [0.6, 2.1] 98.4 [97.8, 99.0] CLAUDE -H AIKU -4.5 54.0 [52.3, 55.9] -1.3 [-4.4, 2.2] 86.0 [82.1, 89.6] CLAUDE -S ONNET -4.6 98.7 [98.3, 99.1] -2.6 [-4.9, -0.5] 99.4 [98.7, 100.0] CLAUDE -O PUS -4.7 90.4 [89.4, 91.5] -1.0 [-2.8, 1.1] 97.3 [96.0, 98.4] 

Table 14: Comprehensive evaluation results for MGSMv2. Complete estimates and 95% confidence intervals for average target accuracy, XLT Gap, and HAT score across all tested model configurations. 

22 A.6 HAT Plots for Different Datasets A.6.1 ECLeKTic HAT Plots 

Detailed evaluation curves and HAT score transfer profiles for the ECLeKTic dataset are provided below. 

> Table 15: HAT profiles for ECLeKTic.

23 A.6.2 MGSMv2 HAT Plots 

Detailed evaluation curves and HAT score transfer profiles for the MGSMv2 dataset are provided below. 

> Table 16: HAT profiles for MGSMv2

24 A.6.3 MMLU-ProX-Lite HAT Plots 

Detailed evaluation curves and HAT score transfer profiles for the MMLU-ProX-Lite dataset are provided below. 

> Table 17: HAT profiles for MMLU-ProX-Lite.

25 Model ECLeKTic Transfer Score HAT Score 

Estimate 95% CI Estimate 95% CI GEMINI -2.5-F LASH 66.0 [63.6, 68.4] 81.7 [78.6, 84.7] GEMINI -2.5-F LASH 

THINKING -O FF 44.9 [42.5, 47.4] 60.4 [55.9, 64.8] GEMINI -3-F LASH 78.0 [76.5, 79.6] 84.6 [82.1, 87.1] GEMINI -3-F LASH LOW 76.2 [74.5, 77.9] 84.0 [81.6, 86.7] GEMINI -3-F LASH MINIMAL 68.0 [66.1, 69.7] 74.2 [70.9, 77.5] GEMMA -3-1B 32.1 [26.3, 38.0] 48.2 [34.9, 61.0] GEMMA -3-4B 45.8 [41.4, 50.6] 56.4 [47.0, 65.9] GEMMA -3-12B 56.2 [51.8, 60.5] 64.1 [56.8, 71.4] GEMMA -3-27B 58.8 [55.1, 62.4] 63.8 [58.4, 69.6] QWEN -3-4B 38.8 [34.3, 43.1] 56.5 [47.8, 64.9] QWEN -3-30B-A3B 48.9 [45.3, 52.8] 65.9 [59.7, 72.6] GPT-OSS-20B 53.5 [49.4, 57.5] 80.1 [74.7, 85.3] GPT-OSS-120B 61.0 [58.0, 63.9] 82.2 [77.9, 86.1] GEMMA -4-E2B-IT 39.0 [35.0, 43.2] 51.8 [42.4, 61.3] GEMMA -4-E4B-IT 43.9 [40.0, 48.1] 58.4 [51.2, 65.7] GEMMA -4-26B-A4B-IT 55.2 [51.8, 58.8] 63.9 [57.9, 69.6] GEMMA -4-31B-IT 55.3 [51.9, 58.6] 68.6 [62.9, 74.1] CLAUDE -H AIKU -4.5 51.1 [48.2, 54.3] 59.8 [53.8, 65.7] CLAUDE -S ONNET -4.6 70.0 [67.9, 72.2] 74.7 [70.9, 78.5] CLAUDE -O PUS -4.7 67.0 [64.9, 69.1] 73.5 [69.7, 77.2] 

Table 18: ECLeKTic Transfer and HAT Scores across models. Source Accuracy 

> Target Accuracy

Figure 9: Gemini-2.5-Flash and Gemini-3-Flash have similar HAT Transfer profiles but their ECLeKTic trans-fer scores show significant improvements in XLT: 66% to 78%, likely due to confounding by improvements in source. 

A.7 Empirical divergence of HAT score from transfer score 

Table 18 contrasts transfer score and HAT Score side-by-side. The metrics are defined in more detail in Section 4. We observe that the transfer score in-creases from 66% for G EMINI -2.5-F LASH to 78% for G EMINI -3-F LASH . Notwithstanding the large improvements to transfer suggested by the transfer score between the models, the transfer profiles of the two models shown in Figure 9 are nearly over-lapping, which is better reflected by comparable HAT scores of 81.7 for 2.5-F LASH and 84.6 for 3-F LASH .

A.8 Average thinking token counts 

Table 19 presents the average thinking token counts for source and target splits across ECLeKTic, MGSMv2 and MMLU-ProX-Lite datasets for the Gemini models used in our work. We make the following observations: (1) Models have slightly longer thinking traces in target languages (15-20% longer thinking on ECLeKTic), (2) Longer think-ing des not trivially translate to better transfer; GEMINI -2.5-F LASH transfers slightly worse than GEMINI -3-F LASH on MMLU-ProX-Lite despite twice the thinking trace length in the former. 26 Dataset Model Split Avg. Thinking Tokens Proportion English Fraction ECLeKTic 

GEMINI -2.5-F LASH source 276.1 - 0.952 GEMINI -2.5-F LASH target 314.9 1.15x 0.965 GEMINI -3-F LASH source 264.5 - 0.951 GEMINI -3-F LASH target 315.9 1.19x 0.959 

MGSM2 

GEMINI -2.5-F LASH source 269.0 - 0.999 GEMINI -2.5-F LASH target 273.3 1.01x 0.992 GEMINI -3-F LASH source 283.2 - 0.999 GEMINI -3-F LASH target 298.0 1.05x 0.990 

MMLU-ProX-Lite 

GEMINI -2.5-F LASH source 1,118.4 - 0.991 GEMINI -2.5-F LASH target 1,258.2 1.13x 0.970 GEMINI -3-F LASH source 689.3 - 0.989 GEMINI -3-F LASH target 675.6 0.98x 0.980 

Table 19: Average token counts and fraction of English tokens for source and target languages across ECLeKTic, MGSMv2 and MMLU-ProX-Lite datasets using Gemini-2.5-Flash and Gemini-3-Flash. 

27