Title: Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech: Arabic, Persian, and German

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.19069v1

Published Time: Wed, 20 May 2026 00:21:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
May 2026 

# Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech: Arabic, Persian, and German 

Sajjad Abdoli *1 , Ghassan Al-Sumaidaee *2 , Clayton W. Taylor *3 , Ahmad (MAD) ElShiekh *4 ,

Ahmed Rashad *

> *

Perle AI sajjad@perle.ai ghassan.al-sumaidaee@perle.ai clayton@perle.ai mad.elshiekh@perle.ai ahmed@perle.ai 

Code-switching вҖ” the natural alternation between two languages within a single utterance вҖ” rep-resents one of the most challenging and under-studied conditions for automatic speech recognition (ASR). Existing commercial ASR benchmarks predominantly evaluate clean, monolingual audio and report a single Word Error Rate (WER) figure that tells practitioners little about real-world mul-tilingual performance. We present a benchmark evaluating five commercial ASR providers across four language pairs: Egyptian ArabicвҖ“English, Saudi Arabic (Najdi/Hijazi)вҖ“English, Persian (Farsi)вҖ“ English, and GermanвҖ“English. Each dataset comprises 300 samples selected by a two-stage pipeline: a heuristic filter scoring transcripts on five structural code-switching signals, followed by a GPT-4o and Gemini 1.5 Pro ensemble scoring candidates across six linguistic dimensions. This pipeline reduces LLM scoring costs by approximately 91% relative to exhaustive scoring. We evaluate the systems on both WER and BERTScore, arguing that BERTScore is a more reliable metric for Arabic and Persian pairs where transliteration variance causes WER to penalise semantically cor-rect transcriptions. ElevenLabs Scribe v2 achieves the lowest WER across all four language pairs (13.2% overall; 13.1% on Egyptian Arabic) and leads on BERTScore (0.936 overall). We further demonstrate that difficulty-stratified analysis reveals performance gaps masked by aggregate aver-ages, and that BERT embedding projections confirm semantic proximity between reference and hy-pothesis despite surface-level script differences. The benchmarking dataset is publicly available at 

https://huggingface.co/datasets/Perle-ai/ASR_Code_Switch .

Keywords: automatic speech recognition, code-switching, multilingual ASR, benchmark, WER, BERTScore, Arabic, Persian, German 

# 1. Introduction 

Multilingual speakers rarely confine themselves to a single language. An Egyptian software engineer on a video call might say: 

simple Щ„ЬқЮЁп»Ҙ бҲ’бҮјШҮаЁҗаІё style пәҚЬіЩҖ Шөа·ңа»ҚаәІ ШҮЩҺпәғ 

(вҖңI like my style to be simpleвҖқ) 

A Persian developer describing a technical problem might say: 

> 1

Corresponding author: sajjad@perle.ai 

> 2

ORCID: 0000-0002-5536-0252 

> 3

ORCID: 0009-0006-6478-8994 

> 4

ORCID: 0009-0001-6837-6202 В© 2026 Perle.ai. All rights reserved. 1

> arXiv:2605.19069v1 [cs.CL] 18 May 2026 May 2026

пә©пәҚпәӯп»© bug аҰүбӮ“бҒ–аЈ–аЈҺ ЪҺајҘ feature аӘҰаӘӨпәҚ 

(вҖңThis new feature has a lot of bugsвҖқ) 

A Saudi product manager addressing their team: 

update пәҚЬіЩҖ shipпәҜп»Ў ЩҺЩҖа§–а§‘ ШҢп»©аӯҚа¬ІЩӢ deadline пәҚЬіЩҖ 

(вҖңThe deadline is tomorrow, we need to ship the updateвҖқ) 

These utterances are representative of everyday speech in multilingual workplaces across the Middle East and beyond. This phenomenon is known as code-switching (CS): the fluid, unconscious alternation between two languages within a single utterance, sentence, or even morphological unit Myers-Scotton 1997; Auer 2013. Despite its prevalence, code-switching remains largely absent from commercial ASR evaluation. Providers typically report WER on clean, monolingual held-out sets. This tells practitioners almost nothing about how a system will behave when deployed for genuinely multilingual populations вҖ” which today includes a substantial portion of global knowledge workers in the Middle East, South Asia, and Europe. This paper makes the following contributions: (i) A curated benchmark of 1,200 code-switching utterances (300 per language pair) across four linguisti-cally diverse language pairs, selected by a reproducible two-stage pipeline. (ii) A comparative evaluation of five commercial ASR systems on this benchmark, reported on both WER and BERTScore. (iii) An argument and empirical demonstration that BERTScore is a more reliable primary metric than WER for Arabic and Persian code-switching due to transliteration variance. WER masks substantial performance disparities on hard samples. (iv) A BERT embedding space analysis providing direct visual evidence that semantically equivalent utter-ances are proximate regardless of script convention. 

# 2. Related Work 

Code-switching has been studied extensively in linguistics Gumperz 1982; Poplack 1980, but work on ASR for code-switching lags considerably behind monolingual recognition. Early work focused on language identification preceding recognition Shia et al. 2004, while more recent approaches integrate end-to-end models with multilingual training data Watanabe et al. 2017; Toshniwal et al. 2018. Benchmark datasets for code-switching ASR include SEAME (Singaporean MandarinвҖ“English, Lyu et al. 2010, the Miami Bangor corpus Deuchar et al. 2014, and the MUCS shared task corpora Diwan et al. 2021. More recently, Xie et al. (2026) introduced SwitchLingua, a large-scale multilingual and multi-ethnic code-switching benchmark with synthesized text and recorded speech across 12 languages. Our work is complementary but differs in focus: rather than constructing a broad multilingual dataset, we evaluate commercial ASR systems on language pairs and regional varieties that remain underrepresented in existing benchmarks, including PersianвҖ“English and multiple ArabicвҖ“English settings spanning Egyptian and Saudi dialectal speech. ArabicвҖ“English code-switching corpora are rarer; notable exceptions include work by Hamed, Elmahdy, and Abdennadher (2017) and the ArzEn corpus Hamed, Vu, and Abdennadher 2020. PersianвҖ“ English and Gulf ArabicвҖ“English code-switching datasets for ASR evaluation remain scarce. Evaluation is another recurring challenge in code-switching ASR. WER is the dominant ASR evalua-tion metric Makhoul et al. 1999, computing the minimum edit distance between reference and hypothesis word sequences Levenshtein 1966. Its limitations for code-switching include insensitivity to script-equivalent translations and no partial credit for semantically correct transcriptions in a different script convention. BERTScore Zhang et al. 2019 addresses some of these limitations by computing token-level cosine similarity in a pretrained embedding space. For multilingual evaluation, bert-base-multilingual-cased Devlin et al. 2019 maps text from 104 languages into a shared latent space, enabling meaningful comparison across scripts.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 2May 2026

Commercial ASR evaluation is also underdeveloped for code-switching. Several studies have benchmarked commercial ASR providers on specific domains or noise conditions Radford et al. 2023; Baevski et al. 2020, but systematic comparison on code-switching audio across multiple language pairs is, to our knowledge, absent from the literature. 

# 3. Benchmark Construction 

3.1. Source Datasets 

Our source datasets are conversational transcripts collected from real-world multilingual speakers across four language pairs: Saudi ArabicвҖ“English, Egyptian ArabicвҖ“English, Persian (Farsi)вҖ“English, and GermanвҖ“ English. The candidate-selection counts are reported in Table 2. Each dataset is reduced to a final benchmark split of 300 challenging utterances. Each sample consists of a single utterance, a reference transcript, and a corresponding audio filename. The final 300 samples for each language pair are selected from the Stage 2 scored pool by ranking rows according to LLM Ensemble_Score , with H_Score used as a tie-breaker. The sample-selection protocol is detailed below. 

3.2. Voice Actor Recruitment and Recording 

The audio recordings paired with each transcript were produced by native speakers recruited through our internal contributor network. For each language pair, we sourced speakers who satisfied three criteria: (i) native or near-native fluency in the target non-English language, with the relevant regional variety (Egyp-tian, Najdi/Hijazi, Tehran-variety Farsi, or standard German); (ii) professional or conversational fluency in English sufficient to produce natural intra-sentential switching rather than read-aloud pronunciation; and (iii) familiarity with the technical and professional registers that dominate the corpus, since natural delivery of terms such as deployment , bottleneck , or deadline embedded in a matrix-language utterance requires the speaker to use them habitually rather than to decode them on the page. Speakers were given the reference transcripts and instructed to deliver each utterance conversationally rather than as a read performance, with latitude to adjust prosody, hesitations, and minor disfluencies to match how they would naturally produce the utterance in context. Recordings were captured in quiet indoor environments using consumer-grade headset or USB microphones, mirroring the acoustic conditions of the remote-work scenarios that the benchmark is intended to represent rather than studio-quality conditions that would overstate ASR performance in deployment. This decision was informed by prior corpus collection work where studio-grade audio was observed to materially understate the error rates that the same systems exhibited on real customer traffic; matching the recording environment to the deployment environment is a precondition for benchmark results that transfer. All contributors consented to the use of their recordings for research and benchmarking purposes under our standard contributor agreement. Per-speaker demographic details and recruitment channel specifics are withheld to protect contributor privacy. Figure 1 shows the distribution of semantic topics across the 300 benchmark samples for each language pair, classified by GPT-4o using a topic taxonomy derived inductively from the corpus itself (no predefined categories). The taxonomy was discovered by presenting a stratified sample of 240 transcripts to the model and asking it to identify recurring semantic domains; all 1,200 transcripts were then classified against the resulting label set. 

3.3. Stage 1: Heuristic Filter Design scope. Stage 1 is explicitly designed for ArabicвҖ“English and PersianвҖ“English pairs. Its core signals rely on the presence of two visually distinct scripts in the same utterance: Arabic/Persian Unicode characters (U+0600вҖ“U+06FF) and Latin characters (AвҖ“Z, aвҖ“z). German and English share the Latin script entirely, so script-based signals are structurally inapplicable to the German dataset. The implications of this design choice are discussed at the end of this subsection.   

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 3May 2026
> Figure 1: Topic distribution of the 300 benchmark samples per language pair, classified by GPT-4o using an inductively derived taxonomy. Topics reflect the actual semantic domains of the code-switching speech corpora.

Scoring signals. Each transcript receives a composite H_Score in [0 , 10] from five weighted signals. 

Script mix ratio (w = 0 .30 ). Let na be the count of Arabic/Persian Unicode characters and nl the count of Latin characters. The raw mix ratio is: 

m = min( na, n l)

na + nl

(1) This ratio peaks at m = 0 .50 when the two scripts appear in equal proportion, but corpus inspection of our ArabicвҖ“English and PersianвҖ“English datasets showed that the median script-mix ratio in genuinely code-switched utterances falls around 0.35 : speakers typically embed shorter English terms into longer Arabic or Persian sentences, producing an asymmetric mix rather than a 50/50 split. Setting mвҲ— = 0 .35 therefore aligns the peak of the signal with the empirically most common mixing pattern in the data: 

hmix = min 

( mmвҲ— , 1

)

Г— 10 (2) A transcript with m < 0.35 scores proportionally; one with m вүҘ 0.35 scores the maximum 10.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 4May 2026

Token alternation rate (w = 0 .30 ). Each token is classified as arabic , latin , or mixed based on the majority character class. Let k be the number of consecutive token pairs that switch between Arabic/Persian and Latin script. Then: 

halt = min 

( kn/ 2 , 1

)

Г— 10 (3) where n is the total token count. The denominator n/ 2 represents the theoretical maximum number of switches in a sentence of n tokens (every adjacent pair alternates scripts). A switch every two tokens gives the maximum score of 10. 

Morphological blend detection (w = 0 .20 ). Regular expressions detect cross-language morphological fusion: the Arabic definite article пәҚп»қ prefixed to a Latin word ( e.g. , пәҚЬіЩҖmeeting ), English stems bearing Arabic plural or adjectival suffixes ( e.g. , developers-аӘҰаӘҠ ), and English stems with German derivational suffixes ( e.g. ,Startup-ung ). Let b be the total regex hits: 

hmorph = min 

( b

3 , 1

)

Г— 10 (4) The ceiling of b = 3 was chosen empirically: manual inspection of 300 randomly sampled transcripts showed that utterances with three or more distinct morphological blending events are already at the upper tail of complexity, and further blending events add negligible additional discriminative value. An utterance with one hit scores 3.3, two hits scores 6.7, and three or more hits scores the maximum 10. 

Length penalty (w = 0 .10 ). Transcripts with fewer than five tokens cannot exhibit meaningful switching and receive hlen = 0 :

hlen =

пЈұпЈІпЈі

0 if n < 5min 

( n вҲ’ 520 , 1

)

Г— 10 otherwise (5) The ceiling of 25 tokens ( nвҲ’5 = 20 ) reflects the 90th percentile of utterance length in our datasets; transcripts at or above this length receive the full score of 10. 

Vocabulary diversity (w = 0 .10 ). Let |vocab | denote the number of unique tokens in the transcript (the type count), and n the total token count (the token count). Their ratio |vocab |/n is the typeвҖ“token ratio (TTR), a standard measure of lexical richness. A TTR of 1.0 means every token is unique (maximally diverse); a TTR near 0 indicates heavy repetition. The threshold 0.7 was selected as the 75th-percentile TTR in our source corpora: most naturally diverse code-switched utterances exceed this value, while repetitive or formulaic utterances fall below it: 

hvocab = min 

( |vocab |/n 

0.7 , 1

)

Г— 10 (6) The composite H_Score is: 

H = 0 .30 hmix + 0 .30 halt + 0 .20 hmorph + 0 .10 hlen + 0 .10 hvocab (7) Table 1 shows H_Score computation for two representative samples from the Egyptian ArabicвҖ“English dataset, illustrating how the five signals combine. Sample A (H_Score 8.37) exhibits dense mixing with six script alternations, multiple Arabic-prefixed English tokens, and a near-maximal mix ratio, placing it in the top difficulty quartile. Sample B (H_Score 5.54) contains only one morphological blend and fewer switches, placing it in the second quartile. 

Per-dataset candidate selection. Table 2 shows how many rows are passed from Stage 1 to Stage 2 per dataset. For Saudi, a random pre-sample of 5,000 rows is drawn from the 27,190-row source corpus before heuristic scoring to manage computational cost.    

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 5May 2026
> Table 1: H_Score of examples (Egyptian ArabicвҖ“English). Sample A is a densely code-switched tech utterance; Sample B is a lighter, shorter mix.

Sample A Sample B 

Transcript пәғЩҺШҮ ЮӮШҮЩ„Ъҳ пәҮп»Ҙ пәҚЬіЩҖ UX flow пә©п»© а©ј а·ңЩәШҮпәқ redesignШҢ пәҚЬіЩҖ screens пәҚЬіЩҖ а¶”аө№ЩӢ confuseЩҖаЁғаІё user п»©аӯҚа¬ІЩӢ mobile пәҚЬіЩҖ аҰҶаҘ»ајҹ ШҮаЁғаІё пәҚЩ‘ЭұЬӯ 

Translation вҖңI think this UX flow needs a redesign, the user gets confused between the screensвҖқ вҖңCall me on the mobile tomorrowвҖқ 

n (tokens) 14 7

na (Ar. chars) 42 19 

nl (Lat. chars) 31 6

m = min /sum 31 /73 = 0 .42 6/25 = 0 .24 

hmix min(0 .42 /0.35 , 1) Г— 10 = 10 .0 min(0 .24 /0.35 , 1) Г— 10 = 6 .9

k (switches) 6 2

halt min(6 /7, 1) Г— 10 = 8 .6 min(2 /3.5, 1) Г— 10 = 5 .7

b (morph hits) 2 ( пәҚЬіЩҖUX , пәҚЬіЩҖuser ) 1 ( пәҚЬіЩҖmobile )

hmorph min(2 /3, 1) Г— 10 = 6 .7 min(1 /3, 1) Г— 10 = 3 .3

hlen min(9 /20 , 1) Г— 10 = 4 .5 min(2 /20 , 1) Г— 10 = 1 .0

|vocab |/n 14 /14 = 1 .0 7/7 = 1 .0

hvocab min(1 .0/0.7, 1) Г— 10 = 10 .0 min(1 .0/0.7, 1) Г— 10 = 10 .0

H_Score 0.30(10 .0) + 0.30(8 .6) + 0.20(6 .7) +0.10(4 .5) + 0 .10(10 .0) = 8.37 

0.30(6 .9)+0 .30(5 .7)+0 .20(3 .3)+0 .10(1 .0)+ 0.10(10 .0) = 5.54  

> Table 2: Stage 1 candidate selection parameters.

Dataset Source Pre-sample LLM Candidates Filter active? 

Saudi 27,190 5,000 1,500 Yes ( вҲј70% reduction) Egyptian 9,153 none 1,200 Yes ( вҲј87% reduction) Persian 1,934 none 600 Yes ( вҲј69% reduction) German 860 none 860 No вҖ” all rows forwarded 

Stage 1 and the GermanвҖ“English pair. The heuristic filter is designed for ArabicвҖ“English and PersianвҖ“ English, where code-switching is structurally visible as an alternation between two distinct Unicode script blocks. For GermanвҖ“English, both languages share the Latin script, so hmix = 0 and halt = 0 identically for all samples. The effective weight sum is therefore Weff = 0 .40 and H вҲҲ [0 , 4] rather than [0 , 10] . This compressed range has no practical consequence since all 860 German rows are forwarded to Stage 2 unconditionally, and H_Score serves only as a tie-breaker rather than a selection threshold. Consumers of H_Score as a standalone difficulty indicator should note that German scores are not directly comparable to Arabic or Persian scores on the [0 , 10] scale. The substantive work for GermanвҖ“English is done entirely by the LLM ensemble in Stage 2. GPT-4o and Gemini 1.5 Pro assess GermanвҖ“English code-switching on its own linguistic merits вҖ” intra-sentential lexical switching, German derivational morphology applied to English stems ( e.g. , downloaden , gedownloadet ), register mixing between colloquial German and English technical vocabulary, and phonological ambiguity at the GermanвҖ“English boundary вҖ” without any dependence on script detection. The LLM ensemble is therefore the appropriate and sufficient tool for this language pair, and the quality of the resulting German benchmark reflects Stage 2 scoring alone.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 6May 2026

3.4. Stage 2: LLM Ensemble Scoring 

Stage 1 captures surface-level structural difficulty for Arabic and Persian pairs and forwards all German rows unconditionally. Stage 2 captures semantic and phonological complexity that requires genuine linguistic reasoning for all four language pairs. Each Stage 1 candidate is sent concurrently to GPT-4o and Gemini 1.5 Pro (one thread per model). Each model scores the transcript across six linguistic dimensions on a 1вҖ“10 scale (Table 3), returns verbatim evidence per dimension, up to five annotated hard tokens with one-sentence ASR risk explanations, and a summary sentence.  

> Table 3: LLM scoring dimensions (Stage 2).

Dimension What it captures 

Morphological blending Cross-language affixes on foreign-language stems Switching density Intra-sentential language switch frequency Slang and register mix Colloquial dialect forms meeting domain-specific jargon Phonological ambiguity Tokens acoustically plausible in either language Named entity/jargon density Brands, technical terms, proper nouns in mixed context Script/orthographic complexity Romanisation inconsistency, mixed-script tokens The Ensemble_Score is the average of both modelsвҖҷ overall_score values (1вҖ“10). Using two inde-pendent models reduces the influence of any single modelвҖҷs idiosyncratic biases; rows where the two models disagree by more than 3 points on any dimension are flagged for inspection. The final 300 samples per language pair are ranked by Ensemble_Score (descending), with H_Score as a tie-breaker. The pipeline is fully resumable via SQLite checkpoint. This two-stage design reduces LLM API calls by approximately 91% compared to scoring all rows directly for Arabic and Persian pairs; for German, all rows are LLM-scored since the dataset size makes exhaustive scoring practical at negligible cost. 

# 4. Evaluation Methodology 

4.1. Systems Evaluated 

We evaluate five commercial ASR systems accessed via their production APIs in May 2026. Table 8 summarises the models; Table 9 lists the exact API parameters used in our benchmark. 

Key architectural distinctions. The five systems represent three different strategies for handling code-switching: вҖў Language-agnostic end-to-end models (ElevenLabs Scribe v2, Google Chirp 3): ElevenLabs Scribe v2 is a state-of-the-art speech recognition model supporting 90+ languages with smart language de-tection вҖ” no language code is required; the model infers the spoken language directly from the au-dio ElevenLabs 2025. Google Chirp 3 is the latest generation of GoogleвҖҷs multilingual ASR-specific generative models, providing enhanced transcription accuracy with automatic language detection; setting 

language_codes=["auto"] instructs the model to вҖңautomatically infer and transcribe in the most preva-lent languageвҖқ without any candidate list Google Cloud 2025. Neither model is given a language hint in our benchmark, making this the most demanding configuration for code-switching: the model must resolve script and language identity from acoustic evidence alone, without the disambiguation advantage of a pre-specified locale set. вҖў LLM-integrated decoder (OpenAI gpt-4o-transcribe): the model builds upon the GPT-4o architecture and is extensively pre-trained on specialised audio-centric datasets OpenAI 2025. Rather than the con-ventional Whisper-style encoder-decoder trained primarily on supervised speech data, gpt-4o-transcribe adopts what OpenAI describes as a вҖңreinforcement learning (RL)-heavy paradigmвҖқ for transcription, combined with extensive midtraining on diverse, high-quality audio OpenAI 2025. This training regime  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 7May 2026

enables the model to leverage the GPT-4o backboneвҖҷs language priors to resolve ambiguity at script and language boundaries вҖ” a property particularly relevant for code-switching audio where acoustic evidence alone is insufficient to determine the correct script convention. No language hint is supplied in our benchmark configuration. вҖў Segment-level language identification (Azure Speech CLID): a discrete language identification (LID) classifier runs at each recognition segment boundary, re-estimating the active language before the acous-tic decoder produces the transcript for that segment. Per MicrosoftвҖҷs documentation, this architecture 

вҖңdoesnвҖҷt support changing languages within the same sentenceвҖқ : intra-sentential switches are invisible to the LID layer and are decoded under whichever language was detected at the segment onset Microsoft Corporation 2024. We set SpeechServiceConnection_LanguageIdMode=Continuous explicitly via the Python SDK, which triggers re-identification at each segment boundary rather than once per session (the 

AtStart default); this alone improved mean WER by 2.0 percentage points across all four language pairs. вҖў Unified multilingual decoder with implicit language handling (Deepgram Nova-3): unlike AzureвҖҷs two-stage design, Nova-3 performs no explicit LID step. Per DeepgramвҖҷs technical documentation, the model вҖңoperates as a truly unified multilingual speech recognition systemвҖқ that вҖңnaturally emits transcrip-tions following the speakerвҖҷs language switches, without relying on explicit routing or language-specific mechanismsвҖқ Deepgram 2025a. This is achieved through вҖңa multi-stage training process that combines synthetic code-switched data at massive scale with carefully curated real-world datasetsвҖқ Deepgram 2025a, covering 10 languages: English, Spanish, French, German, Hindi, Russian, Portuguese, Japanese, Italian, and Dutch Deepgram 2025b. Arabic and Persian are absent from this language list, which is why Nova-3 results are suppressed for all Arabic and Persian pairs in our benchmark. This architectural distinction is consequential for code-switching evaluation: language-agnostic and LLM-integrated decoders can in principle produce mixed-script output within a single sentence, whereas segment-level LID systems are structurally limited to producing one script per recognition segment. The WER and BERTScore results reported in Section 5 reflect this constraint directly. Deepgram Nova-3 does not list Arabic or Persian in its documented CS language support. For these pairs we suppress WER and BERTScore and exclude the system from aggregate rankings вҖ” evaluating a system outside its design envelope produces numbers that reflect the absence of capability, not a fair comparison. 

4.2. Text Normalisation 

Before computing any metric, both reference and hypothesis are normalised: lowercased, punctuation removed, whitespace collapsed. Arabic and Persian script characters are preserved throughout вҖ”a model transcribing Arabic-script speech in Latin characters is penalised, not rewarded. We note that production Arabic and Persian ASR pipelines typically apply additional canonicalisation steps beyond what we use here: unification of hamza variants ( пәғ/пәҮ/пәҚ), collapsing ta marbuta to ta (пә“ вҶ’ п»©), diacritic stripping, and conversion between Arabic-Indic ( Щ ЩЎЩў ) and Western (012) digit forms. We deliberately omit these here to evaluate the raw output of each providerвҖҷs decoder without masking systematic preprocessing differences between systems. A consequence is that orthographic variants that a production system would treat as identical are penalised by WER in our setup. BERTScore is partially robust to these variants because the multilingual encoder maps them to nearby points in embedding space; this is an additional reason to report both metrics rather than either alone. 

4.3. Word Error Rate 

WER is defined as: WER = S + D + IN (8) where S, D, I are substituted, deleted, and inserted words in the minimum-edit-distance alignment between reference (length N ) and hypothesis, found via dynamic programming (the jiwer library). WER can exceed 1.0 when insertions are numerous.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 8May 2026

Crucially, WER has no concept of semantic equivalence: the substitution feature вҶ’ ЪЈЪҶЫ«Э  (Persian translit-eration of вҖңfeatureвҖқ) incurs the same unit penalty as substituting a completely wrong word. 

4.4. BERTScore 

BERTScore Zhang et al. 2019 computes soft token alignment in the embedding space of a pretrained transformer. Let R = {r1, . . . , r m} and H = {h1, . . . , h n} be the reference and hypothesis token sets with contextual embeddings ri, hj вҲҲ Rd. Precision and recall: 

PBERT = 1

|H|

вҲ‘ 

> hjвҲҲH

max  

> riвҲҲR

cos( hj , ri) (9) 

RBERT = 1

|R|

вҲ‘

> riвҲҲR

max   

> hjвҲҲH

cos( ri, hj ) (10) F1 is the harmonic mean: 

FBERT = 2 В· PBERT В· RBERT 

PBERT + RBERT 

(11) We use bert-base-multilingual-cased (mBERT; Devlin et al. (2019)), pre-trained on 104 languages. The critical property for CS evaluation is that mBERT maps tokens from all languages into a shared latent space, so semantically equivalent tokens in different scripts вҖ” e.g. , feature and ЪЈЪҶЫ«Э  вҖ” are geometrically proximate. A transcription semantically correct but using a different script convention receives a high FBERT ,whereas it receives a full substitution penalty under WER. We use lang="others" (multilingual mode, no baseline rescaling) and batch size 32. 

# 5. Results 

5.1. Overall Rankings 

Table 4 reports the overall mean WER and BERTScore for each system. Figures 2 and 3 show the full breakdown across all four language pairs in a single view. ElevenLabs Scribe v2 leads on both metrics across all four language pairs.  

> Table 4: Overall results across CS-supported language pairs. Deepgram evaluated on German only.

System Mean WER Mean BERTScore CS Pairs 

ElevenLabs Scribe v2 13.2% 0.936 4OpenAI gpt-4o-transcribe 38.6% 0.856 4Google Chirp 3 39.4% 0.862 4Azure AI Speech (CLID) 43.6% 0.839 4Deepgram Nova-3 5.0% вҖ  0.959 вҖ  1 

> вҖ 

German only; not directly comparable. 

Note on Deepgram. Deepgram Nova-3 achieves 5.0% WER and 0.959 BERTScore, but these figures are from the GermanвҖ“English pair only. Its вҖңoverallвҖқ number reflects one of the easiest language pairs in our benchmark and is not comparable to systems evaluated across all four pairs. 

5.2. Performance Across Language Pairs 

Figures 2 and 3 report the per-language-pair results, making separate result tables unnecessary. Across Egyptian ArabicвҖ“English, Saudi ArabicвҖ“English, PersianвҖ“English, and GermanвҖ“English, ElevenLabs Scribe     

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 9May 2026
> Figure 2: Mean WER (%) for all five systems across all four language pairs. Each group of bars represents one language pair; bars within a group are colour-coded by system. Deepgram results shown for German only (no Arabic/Persian CS support). Lower is better.

v2 is the most consistent system: it achieves the lowest WER for all four language pairs and remains competitive or leading on BERTScore. The Arabic pairs are substantially harder than GermanвҖ“English. Egyptian ArabicвҖ“English includes dense intra-sentential switching, as in: 

screens пәҚЬіЩҖ а¶”аө№ЩӢ confuseЩҖаЁғаІё user пәҚЬіЩҖ ШҢredesign пәқШҮЩәа·ң а©ј пә©п»© UX flow ЮӮШҮЩ„Ъҳ пәҮп»Ҙ пәҚЬіЩҖ ШҮЩҺпәғ 

(вҖңI think this UX flow needs a redesign, the user gets confused between the screensвҖқ) 

Saudi ArabicвҖ“English introduces additional dialectal variation through Najdi and Hijazi speech. Google Chirp 3 performs worse on Saudi Arabic than on Egyptian Arabic, suggesting that Gulf dialectal phonology remains less robustly covered than more widely represented Arabic varieties. ElevenLabs retains a clear advantage on both Arabic pairs, indicating that its gains are not limited to a single dialect. PersianвҖ“English shows the strongest mismatch between WER and semantic adequacy. Farsi uses right-to-left Perso-Arabic script, while English words may remain in Latin script or be transliterated. For example, a reference containing feature, bug, and deadline may be transcribed with semantically equivalent Persian forms such as ЪЈЪҶЫ«Э  and ЩӢШҮЪҜ . WER treats these as string substitutions, whereas BERTScore gives partial credit for their semantic equivalence. This explains why Persian results in Figure 3 are less severe than the corresponding WER gaps in Figure 2. GermanвҖ“English is the easiest pair because both languages use the Latin script, reducing transliteration ambiguity. The leading systems cluster closely on this pair, and WER and BERTScore are much more concordant than for Arabic or Persian. Deepgram Nova-3 is therefore reported only for GermanвҖ“English and should not be interpreted as an overall competitor to systems evaluated across all four pairs. Taken together, the language-pair results show that aggregate scores hide important structure: Arabic performance is shaped by dialectal coverage, Persian performance is shaped by script and transliteration choices, and German performance reflects a lower-ambiguity code-switching setting.   

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 10 May 2026
> Figure 3: Mean BERTScore F1 for all five systems across all four language pairs ( bert-base-multilingual-cased ). BERTScore rewards semantically correct transliteration that WER would penalise. Higher is better.

Appendix D provides the full qualitative side-by-side transcription comparison for the highest-divergence examples across all language pairs, including Table 10. 

# 6. Analysis 

6.1. Difficulty-Stratified Performance 

A well-calibrated benchmark should show rising error rates as difficulty increases. We stratify all CS-supported samples into quartiles by H_Score and compute mean WER per quartile (Table 5).  

> Table 5: Mean WER by H_Score difficulty quartile (CS-supported samples; Deepgram excluded).

Quartile ElevenLabs Google OpenAI Azure 

Q1 (easiest) 2.0% 4.4% 9.7% 17.1% Q2 13.9% 30.8% 46.2% 46.4% Q3 15.0% 54.4% 48.7% 54.2% Q4 (hardest) 20.0% 61.5% 45.2% 52.2% Benchmark calibration holds: WER increases Q1 вҶ’Q4 for all systems. The gap between ElevenLabs and Google Chirp 3 is 2.4 percentage points at Q1 but 41.5 points at Q4. Systems that appear broadly comparable on aggregate WER diverge dramatically when evaluated on the hardest code-switching instances. 

6.2. BERTScore Across Difficulty Quartiles 

Table 6 reveals a counterintuitive finding: ElevenLabsвҖҷ BERTScore increases from Q3 (0.929) to Q4 (0.938) вҖ” the hardest quartile receives the highest non-Q1 score of any system. Q4 is dominated by Arabic and Persian utterances with heavy morphological blending and dense switch-  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 11 May 2026
> Table 6: Mean BERTScore F1 by H_Score difficulty quartile.

Quartile ElevenLabs Google OpenAI Azure 

Q1 (easiest) 0.961 0.962 0.949 0.896 Q2 0.920 0.889 0.826 0.839 Q3 0.929 0.819 0.826 0.812 Q4 (hardest) 0.938 0.797 0.837 0.817 ing. We hypothesise that ElevenLabs consistently picks a single script convention and applies it coherently, whereas other models produce inconsistent outputs. WER penalises any deviation from the referenceвҖҷs script convention; BERTScore rewards semantic fidelity regardless of script. ElevenLabsвҖҷ Q4 BERTScore advan-tage therefore suggests it is capturing semantic content correctly even when WER would count its output as wrong. 

6.3. WERвҖ“BERTScore Divergence by Language Pair 

To quantify how consistently WER and BERTScore agree on the relative ranking of ASR systems, we compute KendallвҖҷs П„ between the two metric orderings for each language pair. For a given language pair with 

n CS-supported systems, KendallвҖҷs П„ is defined as: 

П„ = C вҲ’ D

(n

> 2

) (12) where C is the number of concordant pairs вҖ” system pairs (i, j ) where both WER and BERTScore agree on which system is better вҖ” and D is the number of discordant pairs where the two metrics disagree. The denominator (n

> 2

) = n(nвҲ’1) /2 is the total number of system pairs. П„ = 1 indicates perfect agreement between the two metric rankings; П„ = вҲ’1 indicates perfect disagreement; П„ = 0 indicates no correlation. Concretely, for each language pair we rank the four CS-supported systems (ElevenLabs, OpenAI, Google, Azure) by mean WER (ascending) and by mean BERTScore (descending), yielding two ordinal rankings. We then count concordant and discordant pairs across these rankings. With four systems there are (42

) = 6 

possible pairs, so П„ вҲҲ {вҲ’ 1, вҲ’0.67 , вҲ’0.33 , 0, +0 .33 , +0 .67 , +1 }.         

> Table 7: WERвҖ“BERTScore rank concordance (KendallвҖҷs П„) by language pair, computed across the four CS-supported systems. П„= 1 = perfect agreement; П„= 0 = no correlation.

Language Pair KendallвҖҷs П„ Concordant / 6 pairs 

GermanвҖ“English 0.80 5 / 6 Egyptian ArabicвҖ“English 0.60 4.8 / 6 Saudi ArabicвҖ“English 0.60 4.8 / 6 PersianвҖ“English 0.40 4.2 / 6 GermanвҖ“English shows the highest concordance ( П„ = 0 .80 ), meaning that five of the six possible system pairs are ranked identically by WER and BERTScore. This is expected: both languages use Latin script, so WERвҖҷs string-matching penalty and BERTScoreвҖҷs semantic similarity measure capture essentially the same underlying quality signal. There is no transliteration ambiguity to drive the two metrics apart. PersianвҖ“English shows the lowest concordance ( П„ = 0 .40 ), indicating that the two metrics disagree on the relative ordering of one or more system pairs вҖ” specifically, systems that rank higher on BERTScore than on WER. This is the quantitative signature of the transliteration variance problem: a system that consistently chooses Persian script for English loanwords will appear worse under WER (penalised for each transliteration) but comparable or better under BERTScore (rewarded for semantic fidelity). The lower П„ for Persian relative to Arabic pairs reflects the higher density of Latin-to-Perso-Arabic transliteration choices in  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 12 May 2026

PersianвҖ“English speech, where English technical vocabulary is routinely rendered in both scripts ( e.g. update 

vs. аі‘аіӢаЈ–аў№пәҒ , content vs. аҫҘаҪ№бӮӨбҒ–Щ·ШЁ ). The two Arabic pairs (Egyptian and Saudi, both П„ = 0 .60 ) fall between German and Persian, reflecting a moderate degree of transliteration-induced metric disagreement. The identical П„ for both Arabic pairs is notable: despite their distinct phonological and lexical properties, both dialects produce the same degree of metric divergence, suggesting that the transliteration challenge is a function of the script boundary rather than dialect-specific vocabulary choices. 

6.4. BERT Embedding Space Analysis 

To provide direct visual evidence that semantically equivalent code-switching utterances are geometrically proximate in the multilingual embedding space вҖ” regardless of script convention вҖ” we project a sample of Persian reference and ElevenLabs hypothesis sentence embeddings into two dimensions. We encode 80 randomly sampled PersianвҖ“English utterance pairs using Reimers and Gurevych 2019, a mul-tilingual sentence encoder trained to place semantically equivalent sentences close together across languages, and reduce to 2D using UMAP McInnes, Healy, and Melville 2018. Figure 4 shows the result.      

> Figure 4: UMAP projection of multilingual sentence embeddings for 80 PersianвҖ“English utterance pairs. Blue = reference transcripts; orange = ElevenLabs Scribe v2 hypotheses. Each grey line connects a referenceвҖ“hypothesis pair. The tight clustering of connected pairs вҖ” short line lengths вҖ” confirms semantic proximity despite surface-level script differences ( e.g. ,feature vs.

ЪЈЪҶЫ«Э  ), consistent with the high PersianвҖ“English BERTScore values reported in Section 5. Pairs with longer connecting lines correspond to samples where the model hallucinated or omitted content. 

Figure 4 reveals several properties of the multilingual embedding space that directly support our argument. First, reference (blue) and hypothesis (orange) points are spatially interleaved throughout the 2D projection with no visible separation between the two clouds, confirming that the encoder does not represent script convention as a distinguishing dimension. Second, the majority of connecting lines are short relative to the typical inter-point distance in the cloud, indicating that most referenceвҖ“hypothesis pairs are geometrically closer to each other than to other utterances вҖ” the visual correlate of high BERTScore. Third, the loose clusters visible in the projection reflect topical and structural similarity rather than language identity: ref-erence and hypothesis points from the same semantic domain co-locate regardless of script convention. Asmall number of pairs with visibly long connecting lines ( вҲј10вҖ“15% of the sample) correspond to genuinely erroneous transcriptions where content was hallucinated or omitted; these are the cases where both WER and BERTScore correctly agree that the transcription is wrong. Crucially, there is no systematic directional offset between blue and orange points, ruling out any encoding bias toward one script convention. The encoder treats feature and ЪЈЪҶЫ«Э  as the same point in meaning-space вҖ” which is precisely why BERTScore rewards  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 13 May 2026

a transcription that WER penalises. 

# 7. Discussion 

7.1. On the Choice of Evaluation Metric 

Our results provide concrete evidence that WER is an unreliable primary metric for Arabic and Persian code-switching evaluation. The Persian example in Section 4.4 illustrates the worst case: 30.8% WER for a semantically correct transcription whose only вҖңerrorsвҖқ are consistent transliteration choices. The embedding analysis in Section 6.4 confirms this at scale: referenceвҖ“hypothesis pairs are geometrically proximate in mBERT space even when WER is elevated. We recommend: (1) always report both WER and BERTScore for Arabic and Persian CS pairs; (2) treat BERTScore as the primary metric when the user population tolerates either script convention; (3) if script consistency is a hard requirement ( e.g. , for downstream NLP pipelines expecting a specific encoding), supplement BERTScore with a script-normalised WER that maps all script variants to a canonical form before comparison. 

7.2. Difficulty Stratification and Benchmark Design 

The large performance spread across difficulty quartiles (Table 5) highlights a general limitation of aggre-gate ASR benchmarks: mean WER over a diverse corpus can obscure failure modes that only manifest at high switching density or morphological complexity. Our two-stage selection pipeline deliberately over-represents these hard cases. The rising Q1 вҶ’Q4 WER gradient validates the H_Score as a meaningful proxy for ASR difficulty despite being computed entirely from surface-level statistics with no semantic knowledge. 

7.3. Dialect Stratification within Arabic 

The two ArabicвҖ“English language pairs in our benchmark (Egyptian ArabicвҖ“English and Saudi ArabicвҖ“ English) are reported as separate aggregates, but the Saudi dataset itself spans at least two distinct dialectal varieties вҖ” Najdi and Hijazi вҖ” which differ phonetically and lexically. Aggregating across them yields a single WER number that can mask substantial per-dialect failure modes. This is not a hypothetical concern: in production Arabic ASR deployments, a model that achieves acceptable mean WER across a mixed-dialect corpus can still fail consistently on one specific dialect, producing systematically worse experience for the segment of customers who speak it. The aggregate number passes; the customer experience does not. We therefore recommend that future ASR benchmarks targeting multi-dialect languages report dialect-stratified WER and BERTScore as a first-class result, on the same footing as language-pair aggregates. The same argument extends to Persian (regional varieties beyond Tehran-variety Farsi) and to any language with substantial internal dialectal variation. A practical consequence for benchmark construction is that dialect coverage should be treated as a separate sampling axis from language pair coverage: balancing language pairs without balancing dialects within them can still produce a benchmark that systematically underrepresents particular speaker populations. Where per-sample dialect labels are unavailable in the source corpus вҖ” as is partially the case for our Saudi dataset вҖ” this analysis cannot be performed retroactively, and we flag this as a corpus-design recommendation rather than a result we are able to report here in full. 

7.4. Deployment Considerations 

The benchmark results reported in this paper measure offline transcription quality on pre-recorded audio. Practitioners selecting an ASR provider for production deployment face a second axis of considerations that aggregate WER and BERTScore do not capture, and which materially affect provider selection.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 14 May 2026

Latency. LLM-integrated decoders such as gpt-4o-transcribe and large end-to-end models such as Scribe v2 typically exhibit higher per-request latency than streaming-optimised systems. For batch transcription workloads (call recordings, archival audio, research corpora) this is irrelevant. For real-time use cases (live captioning, conversational agents, contact-centre assistance) the highest-accuracy model on this benchmark may not be the right choice; a system with marginally higher WER but sub-second streaming latency can deliver a better end-user experience. 

Cost at production volume. Per-minute pricing varies by approximately an order of magnitude across the providers evaluated. For an enterprise transcribing tens of thousands of hours per month, this dominates the total cost of ownership and can reverse the apparent ranking from accuracy alone. We deliberately do not report current pricing in this paper because provider pricing changes faster than the publication cycle, but practitioners should compute the cost-adjusted ranking for their specific volume profile rather than selecting on WER alone. 

Segment-level LID failure modes in real traffic. The architectural limitation discussed in Section 4 вҖ” that segment-level LID systems cannot switch languages within a recognition segment вҖ” has a concrete operational consequence in customer support traffic, where a single utterance frequently contains a matrix-language sentence with one or two embedded English technical terms. In our experience deploying Arabic ASR to Gulf enterprise customers, this is the modal utterance shape in banking, healthcare, and telco support calls, not the exception. A system that cannot represent within-utterance switching will systematically misrecognise this shape regardless of how well it performs on the monolingual segments either side of the switch. 

Evaluation harness design. We emphasise that the choice of evaluation methodology matters as much as the choice of model. A benchmark that reports a single aggregate WER number across all dialects and all switching densities will rank models very differently from one that stratifies by difficulty (Table 5) and by dialect (Section 7.3). Practitioners selecting a provider for a specific deployment should build their own evaluation harness against samples representative of their actual traffic, rather than relying on any single published WER figure вҖ” including ours. 

7.5. Future Work Broader speaker demographics. Future benchmark releases should expand coverage beyond the current Saudi Najdi and Hijazi varieties to include additional Gulf dialects. Similarly, the Persian dataset should be extended beyond informal Tehran-variety speech to include a wider range of regional Farsi varieties and speaker backgrounds. 

Wider domain coverage. Future work should evaluate code-switching ASR outside the technology and professional contexts emphasized here. Domains such as healthcare, education, public services, and casual conversation may exhibit different code-switching patterns, lower English loanword density, and different error profiles. 

Reference transcript normalization. A useful extension would be to develop multi-reference or normalization-aware evaluation protocols that explicitly account for transliteration variability in human annotations. Such protocols would better distinguish genuine recognition errors from acceptable script or spelling alternatives. 

Longitudinal commercial evaluation. Because commercial ASR systems change over time, future bench-mark runs should repeat this evaluation across model versions and release cycles. Longitudinal tracking would make it possible to measure whether provider updates improve code-switching robustness or simply shift er-rors across language pairs and domains.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 15 May 2026

# 8. Conclusion 

We have presented a benchmark for evaluating commercial ASR systems on code-switching speech, covering four language pairs spanning three scripts and two linguistic families. Our two-stage selection pipeline selects structurally and semantically difficult samples while reducing LLM scoring costs by вүҲ 91% .ElevenLabs Scribe v2 is the strongest performer across all four language pairs by both WER and BERTScore, with the gap largest on Arabic pairs (3.5 Г— advantage on Egyptian Arabic WER of 13.1% vs. 45.9% for the next competitor) and smallest on German, where all but one system achieves under 10% WER. Azure AI Speech achieved a mean WER of 43.6% across all four language pairs after explicitly enabling SpeechService Connection_LanguageIdMode=Continuous in the SDK configuration вҖ” an improvement of 2.0 percentage points over the default AtStart LID mode, with the largest gain on GermanвҖ“English (17.1% vs. 20.5%). We demonstrate that WER systematically underestimates the quality of Arabic and Persian transcriptions due to script convention variance, and that BERTScore with a multilingual encoder provides a more reliable quality signal. BERT embedding projections confirm at scale that referenceвҖ“hypothesis pairs are semantically proximate despite surface-level script differences. Difficulty stratification further reveals that aggregate WER conceals dramatic performance gaps that only emerge on high-complexity code-switching samples. 

# References 

Auer, Peter, ed. (2013). Code-Switching in Conversation: Language, Interaction and Identity . London: Rout-ledge. Baevski, Alexei et al. (2020). вҖңwav2vec 2.0: A Framework for Self-Supervised Learning of Speech Represen-tationsвҖқ. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 33, pp. 12449вҖ“12460. Deepgram (2025a). Introducing Nova-3: Setting a New Standard for AI-Driven Speech-to-Text . Deepgram Blog. Accessed: May 2026. url : https://deepgram.com/learn/introducing-nova-3-speech-to-text-api .вҖ” (2025b). Nova-3 Multilingual Goes GA: Real-Time Code-Switching Across 10 Languages . Deepgram Devel-oper Changelog. Accessed: May 2026. url : https://developers.deepgram.com/changelog/2025/3/31 .Deuchar, Margaret et al. (2014). Building Bilingual Corpora . Miami Bangor Corpus. Devlin, Jacob et al. (2019). вҖңBERT: Pre-Training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Under-standingвҖқ. In: Proceedings of NAACL-HLT , pp. 4171вҖ“4186. Diwan, Anuj et al. (2021). вҖңMultilingual and Code-Switching ASR Challenges for Low Resource Indian LanguagesвҖқ. In: Proceedings of Interspeech , pp. 2446вҖ“2450. ElevenLabs (2025). Models: Scribe v2 . ElevenLabs Documentation. Accessed: May 2026. url : https : / / elevenlabs.io/docs/overview/models#scribe-v2 .Google Cloud (2025). Chirp 3 Transcription: Enhanced Multilingual Accuracy . Google Cloud Speech-to-Text Documentation. Accessed: May 2026. url : https://docs.cloud.google.com/speech-to-text/docs/ models/chirp-3 .Gumperz, John J. (1982). Discourse Strategies . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hamed, Injy, Mohamed Elmahdy, and Slim Abdennadher (2017). вҖңCollection and Annotation of Egyptian Arabic-English Code-Switched DataвҖқ. In: Proceedings of the Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop ,pp. 124вҖ“130. Hamed, Injy, Ngoc Thang Vu, and Slim Abdennadher (May 2020). вҖңArzEn: A Speech Corpus for Code-switched Egyptian Arabic-EnglishвҖқ. eng. In: Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference . Ed. by Nicoletta Calzolari et al. Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association, pp. 4237вҖ“4246. isbn : 979-10-95546-34-4. url : https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.523/ .Levenshtein, Vladimir I. (1966). вҖңBinary Codes Capable of Correcting Deletions, Insertions, and ReversalsвҖқ. In: Soviet Physics Doklady 10.8, pp. 707вҖ“710. Lyu, Dau-Cheng et al. (2010). вҖңSEAME: A Mandarin-English Code-Switching Speech Corpus in South-East AsiaвҖқ. In: Proceedings of Interspeech , pp. 1986вҖ“1989. Makhoul, John et al. (1999). вҖңPerformance Measures for Information ExtractionвҖқ. In: Proceedings of DARPA Broadcast News Workshop , pp. 249вҖ“252.  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 16 May 2026

McInnes, Leland, John Healy, and James Melville (2018). вҖңUMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension ReductionвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426 .Microsoft Corporation (2024). Implement language identification вҖ” Azure AI Speech . Microsoft Azure Doc-umentation. Accessed: May 2026. url : https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/ai-services/ speech-service/language-identification .Myers-Scotton, Carol (1997). Duelling Languages: Grammatical Structure in Codeswitching . Oxford: Oxford University Press. OpenAI (2025). Introducing Next-Generation Audio Models in the API . OpenAI Blog. Accessed: May 2026. 

url : https://openai.com/index/introducing-our-next-generation-audio-models/ .Poplack, Shana (1980). вҖңSometimes IвҖҷll Start a Sentence in Spanish Y TERMINO EN ESPAГ‘OL: Toward a Typology of Code-SwitchingвҖқ. In: Linguistics 18.7вҖ“8, pp. 581вҖ“618. Radford, Alec et al. (2023). вҖңRobust Speech Recognition via Large-Scale Weak SupervisionвҖқ. In: Proceedings of ICML .Reimers, Nils and Iryna Gurevych (2019). вҖңSentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-NetworksвҖқ. In: Proceedings of EMNLP-IJCNLP , pp. 3982вҖ“3992. Shia, Chi-Jiun et al. (2004). вҖңLanguage boundary detection and identification of mixed-language speech based on map estimationвҖқ. In: 2004 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing .Vol. 1. IEEE, pp. IвҖ“381. Toshniwal, Shubham et al. (2018). вҖңMultilingual Speech Recognition with a Single End-to-End ModelвҖқ. In: 

Proceedings of ICASSP , pp. 4904вҖ“4908. Watanabe, Shinji et al. (2017). вҖңHybrid CTC/Attention Architecture for End-to-End Speech RecognitionвҖқ. In: Proceedings of Interspeech , pp. 3408вҖ“3412. Xie, Peng et al. (2026). вҖңSwitchLingua: The First Large-Scale Multilingual and Multi-Ethnic Code-Switching DatasetвҖқ. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38. Zhang, Tianyi et al. (2019). вҖңBertscore: Evaluating text generation with bertвҖқ. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675 .

# A. ASR Systems and API Parameters 

Tables 8 and 9 document the systems evaluated and the exact API parameters used for the benchmark. 

# B. H_Score Formula and Signal Weights 

Full H_Score composite (Equation 7): 

H = 0 .30 hmix + 0 .30 halt + 0 .20 hmorph + 0 .10 hlen + 0 .10 hvocab 

hmix = min 

( min( na,n l)/(na+nl)0.35 , 1

)

Г— 10 

halt = min 

( kn/ 2 , 1

)

Г— 10 

hmorph = min ( b 

> 3

, 1) Г— 10 

hlen =

{

0 n < 5min ( nвҲ’520 , 1) Г— 10 n вүҘ 5

hvocab = min 

( |vocab |/n  

> 0.7

, 1

)

Г— 10 

# C. LLM Scoring Prompt Structure 

Each LLM receives the transcript text and language pair label and returns a JSON response with the following schema (temperature 0.1):                     

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 17 May 2026
> {" overall_score ": <int 1-10>, " dimensions ": {" morphological_blending ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} , " switching_density ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} , " slang_and_register_mix ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} , " phonological_ambiguity ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} , " named_entity_jargon_density ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} , " script_orthographic_complexity ": {" score ":<1-10>, " evidence ":"..."} }, " hard_tokens ": [{" token ":"..." , " reason ":"..."} , ...] , " summary ": "..." }

The Ensemble_Score is the average of both overall_score values. Rows where the two models disagree by > 3 points on any dimension are flagged for manual review. 

# D. Qualitative Transcription Comparison 

Table 10 presents a comprehensive side-by-side comparison across all four language pairs and all CS-supported models . For each language pair, the 5 samples with the highest WERвҖ“BERTScore divergence are selected вҖ” these are the cases where WER most severely over-penalises a semantically correct transcription due to transliteration variance. The вҲҶ column is the key signal, defined as: 

вҲҶ = WER вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ FBERT ) (13) where 1 вҲ’ FBERT is the semantic error rate implied by BERTScore вҖ” converting it to the same scale as WER (lower = better). Interpreting вҲҶ:вҖў вҲҶ > 0: WER penalises the transcription more than its semantic distance from the reference justifies. This is the signature of transliteration variance вҖ” the model produced the correct meaning in a different script convention. вҖў вҲҶ вүҲ 0: both metrics agree; the transcription error is genuine, not a script-convention artefact. вҖў вҲҶ < 0: BERTScore detects more semantic distance than WER counts as word errors (rare). Rows with вҲҶ > 0.10 are shown in bold . Deepgram is included for German only (no Arabic/Persian CS support).   

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 18 May 2026
> Table 8: ASR systems evaluated, their underlying architecture, and code-switching (CS) language pair support.

Provider Model CS Mechanism CS Pairs 

ElevenLabs Scribe v2 End-to-end multilingual encoder; automatic lan-guage detection without explicit language input; native intra-utterance code-switching across 99 languages All 4 OpenAI gpt-4o-transcribe GPT-4o decoder directly integrated into the audio pipeline; encoder and language model share weights, enabling contex-tual disambiguation of mixed-language tokens All 4 Google Chirp 3 Universal Speech Model (USM) trained on 12M hours across 300+ languages; language-agnostic transcription via 

language_codes=["auto"] 

in the Speech-to-Text v2 API All 4 Microsoft Azure Speech (CLID) Continuous Language Identification mode (LanguageIdMode=Continuous ); segments audio at utter-ance level and re-identifies language per segment; up to 10 candidate languages supplied to 

AutoDetectSourceLanguageConfig 

All 4 Deepgram Nova-3 Unified multilin-gual decoder with 

language=multi ; trained on synthetic code-switched data across 10 languages including English, Span-ish, French, German, Hindi, Russian, Portuguese, Japanese, Italian, and Dutch; Arabic and Persian not in the documented CS language list German only  

> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 19

May 2026 

Table 9: API parameters used for each system in this benchmark. Parameters not listed were left at provider defaults. All audio was resampled to 16 kHz mono WAV before submission to Azure (SDK requirement); other providers received the original MP3 files. 

Provider Endpoint / SDK Key parameters 

ElevenLabs POST /v1/speech-to-text model_id=scribe_v2 ; no language_code supplied (automatic detection); 

diarize=false ; no_verbatim=false 

OpenAI POST /v1/audio/ /transcriptions model=gpt-4o-transcribe ; no language supplied (automatic detection); 

response_format=text ; temperature=0 

Google Speech-to-Text v2 

Recognize model=chirp_3 ; language_codes=["auto"] (language-agnostic mode); 

auto_decoding_config={} ; region endpoint us-speech.googleapis.com 

Microsoft Azure Speech SDK v1.x (Python) 

SpeechServiceConnection_LanguageIdMode=Continuous (explicitly set via 

set_property() ; default is AtStart ); AutoDetectSource-LanguageConfig with 4 candidate locales per dataset ( e.g. , ar-EG, en-US for Egyptian Arabic); continuous recognition; workers forced to 1 to avoid macOS SDK audio concurrency issue Microsoft Corporation 2024 Deepgram POST /v1/listen model=nova-3 ; language=multi (multilingual code-switching mode); 

smart_format=true ; punctuate=true 

Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 20 May 2026  

> Table 10:  Comprehensive qualitative comparison across all four language pairs and CS-supported models. Rows are selected to maximise WERвҖ“BERTScore divergence ( вҲҶ =  WER  вҲ’ (1  вҲ’ FBERT )):  a positive  вҲҶ means WER penalises the transcription more than its semantic error rate justifies вҖ” the signature of transliteration variance. Bold =  вҲҶ > 0.10 . Deepgram shown for German only.
> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> Egyptian ArabicвҖ“English  (5 samples with highest WERвҖ“BERTScore divergence)
> ЮҠаЎӨаЎІаҫҳпәҚЬіЮҠ бҲ’бҮӯ аіһаІұаЁөШ— bug бҲ’бҮӯ пәҜп»Ўа§–а§‘ ШҢusers ЩҖбӢӯбӢ§ logout ШЈЭ„ЬӯаЁғаІё ЩҺШЈЭ„бҲ’бҮӯ fix б„©б„Ҙ пәға№ӨаҪ„п»ү п»ӯЪўШЁ.
> ElevenLabs  system пәҚЬіЩҖ бҲ’бҮӯ аіһаІұаЁөШ— bug бҲ’бҮӯ .users ЩҖбӢӯбӢ§ log out ШЈЭ„ЬӯаЁғаІё п»үа№ӨаҪ„пәғ бҲ’бҮӯ fix б„©б„ҹ пәҜп»Ў ЩҺШЈЭ„Ьӯа§–а§‘ п»ӯЪўШЁ
> 46.7%  0.879  +0.346
> OpenAI  бҲ’бҮӯ ЩӢЬҒ бҲ’бҮӯ аіһаІұаЁөШ— пәҚЬіЮҠаҫҳЮҠаЎӨаЎІ аЁғаІёШЈЭ„Ьӯ ЬіЮЁпәқ пәҚп»ӯпә• бӢӯбӢ§ЩӯЮЁпәҜпәӯпәҜ. а§–а§‘пәҜп»Ў ЩҺШЈЭ„б„©б„Ҙ ЪЈЩӯЬқЭҙ бҲ’бҮӯ пәға№ӨаҪ„п»ү п»ӯЪўШЁ.
> 33.3%  0.832  +0.165
> Google  ЮҠаЎӨаЎІаҫҳпәҚЬіЮҠ бҲ’бҮӯ аіһаІұаЁөШ— bug бҲ’бҮӯ аЁғаІёШЈЭ„Ьӯ бӢӯбӢ§ log outЩӯЮЁпәҜпәӯпәҜШҢ а§–а§‘пәҜп»Ў ЩҺШЈЭ„Ьӯ бҲ’бҮӯ fix б„©б„ҹ пәға№ӨаҪ„п»ү п»ӯЪўШЁ.
> 33.3%  0.927  +0.260
> Azure  бҲ’бҮӯ ЩӢШҮпәқ бҲ’бҮӯ аіһаІұаЁөШ— пәҚЬіЮҠаҫҳЮҠаЎӨаЎІ аЁғаІёШЈЭ„Ьӯ ЬіЮЁпәқ пәғп»ӯпә• бӢӯбӢ§ЩӯЮЁпәҜпәӯШҹ а§–а§‘пәҜп»Ў ЩҺШЈЭ„бҲ’бҮӯ б„©б„Ҙ пәға№ӨаҪ„п»ү п»ӯЪўШЁШҹ
> 40.0%  0.785  +0.185
> internet connection пәҚЬіЩҖ ЩӢпәҚЬібӢӣбӢҠШҮпәӯпә©пә“ШҢ ајЎШҮп»ӯЬіШЁ  п»ӯЫӢЭ· ајҘЪҺпәҚ troubleshooting ЬӯбҶҮб…Ұпәғ бӢӯбӢ§Э пәҚп»ӯЯҷЯө аҫөаё·ЭҒЪ°аҫҳЭ· ЪЈШҮаЈ–аўҙпә“.
> ElevenLabs  internet connection пәҚЬіЩҖ п»ӯЫӢЭ· ајҘЪҺпәҚ пәҚЬібӢӣбӢҠШҮпәӯпә©пә“. ајЎШҮп»ӯЬіШЁ ЩҖбӢӯбӢ§ troubleshooting ЬӯбҶҮб…Ұпәғ пә“аЈ–аўҙШҮЪЈ Э·аҫҳЪЈ ШҮЭҒаҫөаё· router
> 46.2%  0.884  +0.345
> OpenAI  пәҚаі‘аІ»а¬«а¬җЩҺа§•а§‘ ЬӢЮЁЩҺЬқЮҚ ЭҶп»ӯЫӢЭ· ајҘЪҺпәҚ пәҚЬібӢӣбӢҠШҮпәӯпә©пә“. ајЎШҮп»ӯЬіШЁ пәғбҶҮб…ҰЬӯ ЯҷЯөЩӢЬӯ ЮӮЮЁаҫҳаҪјЩ·Ъҫ бӢӯбӢ§Э пәҚп»ӯЯҷЯө аҫөаё·ЭҒЪ°аҫҳЭ· ЪЈШҮаЈ–аўҙпә“.
> 53.8%  0.875  +0.414
> Google  пәҚаі‘аІ»а¬«а¬җЩҺа§–а§‘ ЬӢЮЁЩҺЬқЮҚ ЭҶп»ӯЫӢЭ· ајҘЪҺпәҚ пәҚЬібӢӣбӢҠШҮпәӯпә©п»© ајЎШҮп»ӯЬіШЁ пәҚбҶҮб…ҰЬӯ ЯҷЯөпәҚЩӢЬӯ ЮӮЮЁаЁҚаІҫЪҫбӢӯбӢ§ Э пәҚп»ӯЯҷЯө аҫөаё·ЭҒШҮ ЪЈаҫҳЭ· ЪЈШҮаЈ–аўұп»©
> 84.6%  0.773  +0.619
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

21 May 2026 Table 10 вҖ“ continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> Azure  пәҚаі‘аІ»а¬«а¬җЩҺа§•а§‘ ЬӢЮЁЩҺЬқЮҚ ЭҶп»ӯЫӢЭ· ајҘЪҺ пәҚ пәҚЬібӢӣбӢҠШҮпәӯпә©п»©Шҹ ајЎШҮп»ӯЬіШЁ пәғбҶҮб…ҰЬӯ ЯҷЯөпәҚЩӢЬӯ ЮӮЮЁаЁҚаІҫЪҫбӢӯбӢ§ Э пәҚп»ӯЯҷЯө аҫөаё·ЭҒШҮ ЪЈаҫҳЭ· ЪЈШҮаЈ–аўҙпә“.
> 76.9%  0.826  +0.595
> ШҮЫіШЈЭ„Ь№аЁҚаІё аҰҢбҚҮбӢ§пәҚ new feature ЭҒШ•пәҚЬіЩҖ integration пә©п»ұ ЫұЩәЫңЩәШҮпәқ .бҲ’бҮҡШҮпәӯај  API
> ElevenLabs  аёЎаёғЫұ Щ„Ъ°ЩӯЪҺ ЮӮ ЮЁпәҚаЁҚаІё аҰҢбҚҮбӢ§ШЈЭ„Ь№ЫіШҮШҹ пәҮпә«пәҚ APIШ•ЭҒ integration п»ҷаЈ–аў» бҲ’бҮҡпәӯШҮај 
> 54.5%  0.775  +0.321
> OpenAI ЭҶ пәҚаЁҗаІё аҰҢбҚҮбӢ§ШЈЭ„Ь№ЫіШҮ пә©п»© а·ңаә№ЩәШҮпәқ пәҚаұҜаұңа°°Э а«°а«Ҹ бҲ’бҮҡШҮпәӯај  APIШ•ЭҒ
> 63.6%  0.822  +0.459
> Google  new feature  81.8%  0.733  +0.551
> Azure  пәғп»Ҙ Щ„Ъ°ЩӯЪҺ ЮӮШһЬӯ пәҚаӘҰаӘ‘ ЭҒЩ·ШҮпәҜп»қШҢ my ШҢintegration ШҢЫ№Щәа·ңаә№ .бҲ’бҮҡпәӯШҮај 
> 90.9%  0.704  +0.613
> а§–а§‘пәҜп»Ў ЩҺШЈЭ„Ьӯ бӢӯбӢ§ commitЩҖЬқЮЁпә© пә©п»© аҰҶаҘ»ајҹ пәҚЬіЩҖ main branch ЪўЩҙЬӯ пәҚЬіЩҖ .пә“аӯҚа¬ІЩӢ п»үШҮаЁҗаІё deadline
> ElevenLabs  code ЬіЩҖ commit пәҜп»Ў ЩҺШЈЭ„Ьӯа§–а§‘ ЪўЩҙЬӯ Main branch аҰҶаҘ»ајҹ пә©п»© .ЬқЮЁпәҚајҹШҮаЁҗаІё deadline
> 42.9%  0.880  +0.308
> OpenAI  а§–а§‘пәҜп»Ў ЩҺШЈЭ„Ьӯ бӢӯбӢ§ commitЩҖЬқЮЁпә© пә©п»© п»үШҮаЁҗаІё аӘҰаӘҠа§–а§‘аЈ–аўҙб„ҙб„ҹЪўЩҙЬӯ пәҚаҫёаёә Я“ЯөпәҚ а¶”аө№а°—бҢ»бӢ§ .п»©аӯҚа¬ІЩӢ
> 50.0%  0.847  +0.347
> Google  а§–а§‘пәҜп»Ў ЩҺШЈЭ„Ьӯ ЬӢЮЁЭҒЩӯШЁ бӢӯбӢ§ЩҖЬқЮЁпә© пә©п»© п»үШҮаЁҗаІё аӘҰаӘҠа§–а§‘аЈ– аўҙб„ҙб„ҹЪўЩҙЬӯ пәҚаҫёаёә Я“ЯөпәҚ а¶”аө№а°—бҢ»бӢ§ .п»©аӯҚа¬ІЩӢ
> 57.1%  0.792  +0.363
> Azure  ,Comet ,Azam Neville main ,Dallas ,Liquid branch of the deadline .with ABUK
> 78.6%  0.678  +0.464
> пәғЩҺШҮ ајЎШҮЭҝЭҙ пәҮп»Ҙ пәҚЬіЩҖ account п»ӯЭҒЭ· hacked б„©б„ҘпәҚЩ‘ШЈЭ„ бҲ’бҮјШҮаЁҗаІё .log in ЬӯбҶҮб…Ұпәӯп»‘ пәғШҮајҹ
> ElevenLabs  пәғЩҺШҮ ајЎШҮЭҝЭҙ пәҮп»Ҙ пәҚа§ҷа§‘ЬӢЮЁбҲ’бҮјШҮаЁҗаІё аі‘аІ» пәҚЩ‘ШЈЭ„Ьӯ hack б„©б„ҹ п»ӯЭҒЭ· ајҹШҮпәӯп»‘ .log in ЬӯбҶҮб…Ұпәғ
> 38.5%  0.922  +0.307
> OpenAI  бҲ’бҮјШҮаЁҗаІё аі‘аІ»п»ӯбӮӨбҒҚа§ҷа§‘ШҮЭҝЭҙ пәҮп»Ҙ пәҚајЎ ШҮЩҺпәғ пәҚЩ‘ШЈЭ„Ыұ б„©б„ҘШҮб„•бғӘ п»ӯЭҒЭ· ајҹШҮпәӯп»‘ пәғбҶҮб…ҰЬӯ ЬіЮЁпәқ пәҮп»Ҙ.
> 38.5%  0.827  +0.211
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 22

May 2026 Table 10 вҖ“ continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> Google  пәҚЩҺШҮ ајЎШҮЭҝЭҙ пәҚп»Ҙ пәҚа§–а§‘ЬӢЮЁбҲ’бҮјШҮаЁҗаІё аі‘аІ» пәҚЩ‘ШЈЭ„Ьӯ Ыұ б„©б„ҹШҮајҘЪҺ п»ӯЭҒЭ· ајҹШҮпәӯп»‘ пәҚбҶҮб…ҰЬӯ ЬіЮЁЫҸЭҶ.
> 76.9%  0.814  +0.583
> Azure  аі‘аІ»п»ӯбӮӨбҒҚа§ҷа§‘ШҮЭҝЭҙ пәғ ЩҺЫ¬пәҚајЎ ШҮЩҺпәғ п»ӯЭҒЭ· б„•бғӘШҮЫұ б„©б„ҘпәғЩ‘ШЈЭ„ .бҲ’бҮјШҮаЁҗаІё ајҹШҮпәӯп»‘ пәғбҶҮб…ҰЬӯ ЬіЮЁпәқ пәҮп»Ҙ.
> 53.8%  0.801  +0.340 Saudi ArabicвҖ“English  (5 samples with highest WERвҖ“BERTScore divergence)
> пәғЬӢаЁҗаІұ а№ҙаҪҮ а¬«а¬’ШЈЩҙаёЎаёғ Щ„ЮЁп»Ў Щ„Эұbug а¬«а¬ғ аіһаІұаЁөШ—ШҢ пәғајҘЬ№Эҙ пәғЭҝЮЁп»ұ check commit ЩҖбӢӯбӢ§Ш• п»ӯпәғпәӯЫҸ logs ЩҖбӢӯбӢ§ пәҚЬіЪҜЪҺбү•бҲ№ШҢ п»ӯбҺӮпә«пәҚ пәҚа·ңаә¶Ь№ШЁ пәҚа§Һа§ҠЮҚб„ӯбӮҚбҒҪ бҲ’бҮҝШҮајҹ satisfaction пәғЫӢЭҙ .achievement ЫҸЩҙШЁ бҲ’бҮғбӮ§бҒҚ
> ElevenLabs  bug а¬«а¬ғЭҒШҮ Щ„Эұ аёЎаёғШЈЩҙаЁҗаІұ пәҖа№ҙаҪҮ а¬«а¬’пәғЬӢ аіһаІұаЁөШ—. пәғајҘЬ№Эҙ пәғЭҝЮЁп»ұ check commitбҢӢбӢ§Ш• п»ӯпәғпәӯЫҸ ogsбҢӢбӢ§ пәҚЬіЪҜЪҺбү•бҲ№ пәҮпә«пәҚ ајЎЬ№ШЁ пәҚа§Һа§ҠЮҚаҫҳајЎ б„ӯбӮҚбҒҪЭҙ ЭҒШҮ а«ӯа«ңЮЁпәҚЬӢЭ· пәҚЬіШЈаЁҠаІҫ Ы№ЩҺбӮ§бҒҚ аҰҢаҘ»ЪҺпәғ treatment
> 68.0%  0.838  +0.518
> OpenAI  пәғЬӢа№ҙаҪҮ а¬«а¬’пәҖаЁҗаІұ ШЈЩҙаёЎаёғ ЭҒЭҶЭ¬а¬«а¬ғ ЪЈа¬«а¬җпә“ аіһаІұаЁөШ— пәғајҘЬ№Эҙ пәғЭҝЮЁп»ұ Щ‘ШҮп»ҷ ЬіЯәа ҠШ—Эҙ п»ӯпәғпәӯЫҸ бӢӯбӢ§Ш•ЩҖЬқЮЁЭҒЩ·ЩәШҮпә• пәҚЬіЪҜЪҺЫ°а®“аӯ· пәҮпә«пәҚ ајЎЬ№ЩӯШЁ пәҚа§Һа§ҠЮҚб„ӯбӮҚбҒҪ ЫӢЮҠЫ° .Щ·ШЁаҙұаҙ–аіә ШҮЩ‘ ШөаҫҳаҪј п»ҘбӮ§бҒҚ аҰҢаҘ»ајҹЭҶ а«°а«ңЭҝЮЁпәҚ
> 80.0%  0.766  +0.566
> Google  пәҚЬӢа№ҙаҪҮ а¬«а¬’пәҖаЁҗаІұ ШЈЩҙаёЎаёғ Щ„ЮЁп»Ў Щ„Эұа¬«а¬ғ ЩӢЭ‘ аіһаІұаЁөШ— пәҚајҘЬ№Эҙ пәҚЭҝЮЁп»ұ а«°а«ңЩӯЫ№ бӢӯбӢ§Яәа ҠЬӢЭҙ п»ӯпәҚпәӯЫҸ бӢӯбӢ§Ш•ЩҖЬқЮЁЭҒЩӯШЁ пәҚЬіЪҜЪҺа®“аӯ· Ы¬пәҚпә«пәҚ пәҚа·ңаә¶Ь№ШЁ пәҚа§Һа§ҠЮҚб„©бӮҚбҒҪ пәҚЫӢЭҙ пәҚЬіЮҠШҮаҫҳаҪјЮҠЪ°ШҮЬӢЮҚ ЭҶајҹШҮбҲ’бҮҝ бҲ’бҮғбӮӨбҒҚ ЫҸЩҙШЁ пәҚаҫҳа«°а«ңЩӯЪ°Э„Щ·ШЁ.
> 76.0%  0.754  +0.514
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

23 May 2026 Table 10 вҖ“ continued    

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> Azure  пәғЬӢа№ҙаҪҮ а¬«а¬’пәҖаЁҗаІұ ШЈЩҙаёЎаёғШҢ п»ӯ Щ„Эұа¬«а¬ғп»ҷ аіһаІұаЁөШ—ШҢ пәғајҘЬ№ЭҙШҢ пәғЭҝЮЁп»ұ а«°а«ңЩӯЫ№ бӢӯбӢ§Яәа ҠЬӢЭҙШҢ п»ӯпәғпәӯЫҸ бӢӯбӢ§Ш•ЩҖЬқЮЁЭҒЩӯЪҺп»ұ пәҚЬіЪҜЪҺбү•бҲ№ пәҮајЎ бҲҢбҮҝШҮб„ӯб„ҹ пәҚа§Һа§ҠЮҚб„ӯбӮҚбҒҪШҢ пәғЫӢбӢқаҪҸШҮ пә©а«ӯа«ҸЪ°ШҮЬӢЮҚ ЭҶаЁҠаІҫ бҲ’бҮғбӮ§бҒҚ аҰҢаҘ»ајҹЪҺпәғ а«°а«ңЩӯЪҳ ЭҒЩӯЩ·ЪҺ.
> 84.0%  0.770  +0.610
> пәҮпә«пәҚ пәҚЬіЩҙЯәа ҠЩ‘ЮЁпәҷ ЭҒШҮ Щ„Ь№ЪҜЮ” пәҚЬіЮҠЭ„ШҮЫ°ајҹ ЭҒЭҶпәғЭҝЮЁп»ұ forget device п»ӯпәғЩӯЪҺ б„•бғӘШҠЩ‘п»ӯпәғ ШҢpairing б„ӯбӮҚбҒҪЮҚа§Һа§ҠЭ пә• пәҚаІЈаІ•б•¬пә«пәҚ пәҚбҺӮп»ӯ ШҢbattery firmware update пәҸа¶»а¶ўпәғ ЮҚШҮп»Ҙ ЯҢЯөЫҸ stableШ•.
> ElevenLabs  пәҮпә«пәҚ пәҚЬіЩҖ Bluetooth ЭҒШҮ Щ„б„ҙб„Ҙ ЭҒЭҶпәҚЬіЮҠЭ„ШҮЫ°ајҹШҢ ЭҝЮЁп»ұ ЪЈЭ Ъў DeviceШ• б„•бғӘШҠЩ‘п»ӯ pairing п»ӯпәғЩӯЪҺ Battery. п»ӯбҺӮпә«пәҚ пәҚаІЈаІ•б•¬Э пә• Firmware пәҸа¶»а¶ў ШҢб„ӯбӮҚбҒҪЮҚа§Һа§ҠпәҚ UpdateЮҚШҮп»Ҙ а· аә¬Ю¶ пәғЭҝаҫҘЩҙЬӯ.
> 59.1%  0.836  +0.427
> OpenAI  пәҮпә«пәҚ пәҚЬіЩҙЯәа ҠЩ‘ЮЁпәҷ ЭҒШҮ Щ„Ь№ЪҜЮ” пәҚЬіЮҠЭ„ШҮЫ°ајҹ ЭҝЮЁп»ұ ЪЈЭ ЪўШЁ пә©Щ„Ъ°ШҮаё° аҫөп»ӯпәғЩӯЪҺ аЁҚаІұа¬«а¬ғЩӢ Шҗп»ӯЩ‘ШҠб„•бғӘ ЭҒЭҶпәҚЬіЩҙЮҡШҮпәӯп»ұ п»ӯбҺӮпә«пәҚ пәҚаІЈаІ•б•¬Э пә• пәҚа§Һа§ҠЮҚа¶»а¶ў б„ӯбӮҚбҒҪпәҸ ЪЈа¬«а¬ғЭҒЮЁЯҢЯө пәғаі‘аІұаЈ–аў»ЮҚШҮп»Ҙ ЯҢЯөЫҸ Ш•ЭҝЩәШҮаЁҠаІұЬӯ.
> 45.5%  0.827  +0.281
> Google Ы¬ пәҚпә«пәҚ пәҚЬіЩҙЯәа ҠЩ‘ЮЁпәҷ ЭҒШҮ ЬіЪҜЮ” пәҚЬіЮҠЭ„ШҮајҹ пәҚЭҝЮЁп»ұ ЪЈЮЁпәӯЫҸЩӯШЁ пә©Щ„Ъ°ШҮаё° аҫөп»ӯпәҚЩӯЪҺ аЁҚаІұа¬«а¬ғЩӢЪҫ п»ӯпәҚЩ‘ШҮб„•бғӘ ЭҒЭҶЩӢШҮЯҷЯөп»ұШҢ пәҚпә«пәҚ пәҚаІЈаІ•б•¬Э пә• пәҚа§Һа§ҠЮҚб„©бӮҚбҒҪ пәҚа¶»а¶ўпәҸ ЪЈа¬«а¬ғп»Ў п»ӯЯҢЯө пәҚаі‘аІұаЈ–аў»ЮҚШҮп»Ҙ ЯҢЯөЫҸ Ш•ЭҝаҫҘЩӯШө.
> 77.3%  0.761  +0.534
> Azure  пәҮпә«пәҚ пәҚЬіЩҙЯәа ҠЩ‘ЮЁпәҷ ЭҒШҮ Щ„Ь№ЪҜЮ” пәҚЬіЮҠЭ„ШҮЫ°ајҹ пәғЭҝЮЁп»ұ ЪЈЭ п»• пәҚб„ҙб„ҹЪЈаҫөаё°ШҮШҢ п»ӯпәғЩӯЪҺ ајҮаәҚа¬«а¬ғЩӢШҢ п»ӯпәғЩ‘ШҠб„•бғӘ ЭҒЭҶаЁҗаІёШҮпәӯШҢ пәҮпә«пәҚ пәҚаІЈаІ•б•¬Э пә• пәҚа§Һа§ҠЮҚа¶»а¶ў .б„ӯбӮҚбҒҪпәҸ ЪЈа¬«а¬ғЭҒЩӯЮЁпәӯ п»ӯаі‘аІұаЈ–аў»бҺӮЮҚШҮп»Ҙ ЯҢЯөЫҸ Ш•ЭҝаҫҳШө.
> 40.9%  0.833  +0.242
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 24 May 2026 Table 10 вҖ“ continued
> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> пәҚЬіЩ·ШЁ пәҮпә«пәҚ Э¬ШҮпәӯ slow п»ӯпәғЩҺШҮЩ·ЪҺп»ұ а«ӯа«ңЬ№аЎ—аЎІШҢ пәғп»ӯп»қ а№ҙаҪҮ пәғЭҝЮЁп»ұ пәғЪЈЭұЬӯ :troubleshooting пәҚа·“а·ӮпәҚп»ӯЯҷЯө п»ӯпәғпәӯЫҸШЈЫ¬ШҢ п»ӯпәғЮӮЩӯЫ№ settingsШҢ п»ӯбҺӮпә«пәҚ ЭҒШҮ ЩҺЪ° Ш•пәғЫӢЮЁп»қ .quick fix ЬӢЩҖ hotspot
> ElevenLabs  пәҚЬіЩ·ШЁ пәҮпә«пәҚ Э¬ШҮпәӯ slowЩ·ЪҺ а«ӯа«ңЬ№аЎ—аЎІ пәғп»ӯп»қ а№ҙаҪҮпәҖ пәҚЭҝЮЁп»ұ пәҚЪЈЭұЬӯ .troubleshooting CheckЫ¬ пәҚпәӯпә©п»© ЭҒШЈ Router п»ӯп»қШҮајЎШ• пә«пәҚ ЭҒШҮ ЩҺЪ°бҺӮп»ӯ settings .Quick fix п»ҷ hotspot
> 54.2%  0.834  +0.375
> OpenAI  пәҚЬіЩ·ШЁ пәҮпә«пәҚ Э¬ШҮпәӯ slowЩ·ЪҺп»ҷ пәғп»ӯп»қ troubleshooting ЭҝЮЁп»ұ пәҖа№ҙаҪҮ пәҚЪЈЭұЬӯ пәҚа·“а·ӮпәҚп»ӯЯҷЯө п»ӯпәҚпәӯЫҸШ•ЮҚЩӯЫ№ п»ӯп»қШҮајЎШ• пә«пәҚ ЭҒШҮ ЩҺЪ°бҺӮп»ӯ settings .quick fix п»ҷ hotspot
> 45.8%  0.860  +0.318
> Google  пәҚЬіЩ·ШЁ пәҚпә«пәҚ Э¬ШҮпәӯ ЭҝЯәа ҠЩ·ЪҺп»ұ а«ӯа«ңЬ№аЎ—аЎІ пәҚп»ӯп»қ а№ҙаҪҮпәҖ пәҚЭҝЮЁп»ұ ЯҷЯөп»ӯЩӢЬӯ ЮӮЮЁаЁҚаІҫЪҫ пәҚЪЈЭұЬӯ пәҚа·“а·ӮпәҚп»ӯЯҷЯө п»ӯпәҚпәӯЫҸШЈ Ы¬п»ӯпәҚЮӮЩӯЫ№ ЭҝаҫҳЩәЩ·Ъҫ п»ӯпәҚпә«пәҚ ЭҒШҮ ЩҺЪ° Ш•пәҚајЎШҮп»ӯп»қ ЫұЮЁпә• ЭҝЩҙЮЁпә• ЬӢЬқ ЮЁЩ„Ы№ ЪЈЩӯЬқЭҙ.
> 79.2%  0.744  +0.536
> Azure  пәҚЬіЩ·ШЁ пәҮпә«пәҚ Э¬ШҮпәӯ ЭҝЯәа Ҡп»ҘЩ·ЪҺ а«ӯа«ңЬ№аЎ—аЎІ пәғп»ӯп»қ а№ҙаҪҮпәҖа«ӯа«ң ЮЁп»ұ пәҚЬіа¬«а¬җп»ӯпәҸ бӢӯбӢ§ЮҚЮЁа¶”аө№Щ‘ШҢ пәҚЪЈЭұЬӯ пәҚа·“а·ӮпәҚп»ӯЯҷЯө п»ӯпәӯЫҸШ•ШҢ п»ӯбҺӮпә«пәҚ ЭҒШҮ ЩҺЪ° ајЎШ•ШҮп»ӯп»қ ЫұЮЁа«ӯа«ңЩҙЮЁп»ҷ п»ӯ Щ„ЬқЪ°ЩӯЬқЭҙ.
> 70.8%  0.794  +0.502
> пәҚЬіЩәЮҡЩҙЩӯЭ‘ Щ„Юҡ Ь№бӮҹбҒҚ errorШ• ЭҒШҮ пәғајЎШҮп»ӯп»қ пәғЭҝЮЁп»ұ аі‘аІёа¶»а¶ў ШҢlogin ШҢп»ӯЭҒШҮ ЭӘЩҙЮ”аЈ– аўҙЪҺајҘ password ЪўЬ№ШЁ а®“аӯ·Ьқ ЭҶserver ЪЈЩӯ Ы¬ЭӘШһЮ”ШҢ ЪЈШҮаЁҗаІ»ЮҷЭ пә• ЮӮЮЁп»ұ п»ӯЭҝЮЁаі‘аІұ пәҚЫӢЩәЫ ШЁ а¬«а¬ғај а§ҷа§‘ШҮЩӢп»ӯ ШҢrefresh .Ы°аЁғаІ»ШҮЩ” пә“аЁөаЁҰ verfiication
> ElevenLabs  пәҚЬіЩәЮҡЩҙЩӯЭ‘ ЭӘЬӯ а¬«а¬ғајҹ пәҚЬіЫ°а°—бҒөбҒҪЮҠЮЁп»ұ password аі‘аІёа¶»а¶ў .LoginЭҶ ајҘЪҺаўҙ аЈ–п»ӯЭҒШҮ аҝҫаҜҮЩҙЫ№. ЪўЬ№ШЁ а®“аӯ·Ьқ server ЪЈЩӯ Ы¬ЭӘШһЮ” ЪЈШҮаЁҗаІ»ЮҷЭ пә• бҲ’бҮ¬ШҮЩӢп»ӯ refresh аі‘аІұЮЁЩ„Ы° п»ӯЭҝЮЁ ЮӮ пә“аЁөаЁҰ verfiication ЪҺа· аә№ пәӯпәҚпәЎ .Ы°аЁғаІ»ШҮЩ”
> 51.8%  0.854  +0.372
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 25 May 2026 Table 10 вҖ“ continued
> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> OpenAI  пәҚа§Һа§ҠЮҚа§Һа§Ҡ б„ӯбӮҚбҒҪШҮ пәҚајЎШҮп»ӯп»қ пәҚЭҝЮЁп»ұ ЬіЮЁп»• Ы¬пәҚп»Ҙ аі‘аІёа¶»а¶ў ЩӢШҮЭҝЮЁпәӯпә© ајҘЪҺаўҙ аЈ–п»ӯЭҒШҮ ЭӘЩҙЮ” ЪўЬ№ШЁ а®“аӯ·Ьқ ЭҶпәҚЬіЮҠа¬«а¬ғЪЈЭ  ЪЈЩӯ ЭӘШһЮ” ЪЈШҮаЁҗаІ»ЮҷЭ пә• ЮӮЮЁп»ұ п»ӯЭҝЮЁаі‘аІұ пәӯ Щ„Ъ°Э аё° аҫёп»ӯа¬«а¬ғај а§–а§‘ШҮЩӢ пәҚЫӢЩәЫ ШЁ ЪЈа¬«а¬ғ Щ„Ъ°ЬқаҫҳЮҚ ЭҶаЁөаЁҰпә“Ы°аЁғаІ»ШҮЩ”
> 55.6%  0.779  +0.335
> Google  Щ‘ЮҡЩҙЩӯЭ‘ Щ„Юҡ Ь№Ш•пәҚЯҢЯөп»ӯпәӯ бӮҹбҒҚ ЭҒШҮ пәҚЭҝЮЁп»ұ ЬіЮЁЫҸ ЭҶаі‘аІёа¶»а¶ў ЩӢШҮЭҝЮЁпәӯпә© ајҘЪҺаўҙ аЈ–п»ӯЭҒШҮ ЭӘЩҙЮ” ЪўЬ№ШЁ а®“аӯ·Ьқ ЭҶЭҝа¬«а¬ғЪЈЭ  бҲ’бҮӯ ЭӘШһЮ” ЪЈШҮаЁҗаІ»ЮҷЭ пә• ЮӮЮЁп»ұ п»ӯЭҝЮЁаі‘аІұ пәӯ Щ„Ъ°Э аё° аҫёп»ӯа¬«а¬ғај а§–а§‘ШҮЩӢ пәҚЫӢЩәШҮпәқ ЪЈа¬«а¬ғЪЈЬқаҫҳЮҚ ЭҶаЁөаЁҰп»©аЁғаІ»ШҮЩ” Ы¬.
> 59.3%  0.784  +0.377
> Azure  Щ‘ЮҡЩҙЩӯЭ‘ Ю—Ь№аЁөШ•п»ӯпәҪ бӮҹбҒҚ ЭҒШҮ пәғЭҝЮЁп»ұ ЬіЮЁЫҸЭҶ. аі‘аІёа¶»а¶ў ЩӢШҮЭҝЮЁп»ӯпәӯпә© ајҘЪҺаўҙ аЈ–п»ӯЭҒШҮ Ю–ЩҙЮ” ЪўЪҺ а®“аӯ·Ьқ ЭҶбҲ’бҮӯ ЭӘШһЮ”. ЪЈШҮаЁҗаІ»ЮҷЭ пә• ЮӮ ЮЁЩ„Ы° п»ӯЭҝЮЁаі‘аІұ пәӯ Щ„Ъ°Э аҫёаё°. п»ӯЩӢШҮа¬«а¬ғај а§ҷа§‘ пәҚЫӢЩәЫ ШЁ .Ы¬аЁғаІ»ШҮЩ” пә“аЁөаЁҰ
> 55.6%  0.807  +0.363
> ЪўЩҙЬӯ ЭҒШҮ пәғаЈ–аў»пәғ ЬіШЈШө пәғЮӮЩӯЫ№ ping п»ӯпәғЭӘЩҙЮ” аҰҶаҘ»ајҹ loadout ЫӢЮҠШө пәҚЬіЩҖ metaШҢ ЭҒЮЁа§–а§‘пәҜп»Ў rush пә©пәҚбү•бҲ№ШҢ teamп»ӯ Ы°а·ңа·ҳп»ӯпәҚ strategyЬҫ Ыұа§ҷа§‘пәҚ work ЭҒЭҜЩҙЮЁп»ҒЮҚШҮп»Ҙ а· аә¶ЩӯШө win ЩҺЮҷЩӯЪҳ.
> ElevenLabs  ЪўЩҙЬӯ ЭҒШҮ пәғЭӘЩҙЮ” ЬіШЈЩҙЫ° пәғЮӮЩӯЫ№ ping Ьҫп»ӯпәғЭӘЩҙЮ” аҰҶаҘ»ајҹ load out ЫӢЮҠШө Ыұпәғ ШҢШҮа®“аӯ·пә©пәҚ rush пәҜп»Ўа§–а§‘ШҢ п»ӯ  бү•бҲЁпәҚ teamworkп»ӯ Ы°а·ңа·ҳп»ӯпәҚ strategy ЭҒЭҜЩҙЮЁп»ҒЮҚШҮп»Ҙ а· аә¶ЩӯШө win ЩҺЮҷЩӯЪҳ.
> 46.2%  0.888  +0.350
> OpenAI  ЪўЩҙЬӯ ЭҒШҮ пәҚЭӘЩҙЮ” пәҚбӢӯбӢ§ШЈЩҙЫ° ЮӮЩӯЫ№ аЁҚаІёЭ‘ п»ӯпәҚЭӘЩҙЮ” ЬіЮЁпә©пәҚп»ӯпә• аҰҶаҘ»ајҹ ЫӢЮҠШө пәҚа§Һа§ҠЩәШҮ п»ӯа§–а§‘пәҜп»Ў пәӯпәө пә©пәҚа®“аӯ·ШҮ пәҚЫұ ЬҫпәҚЭҝа¬«а¬җпәҚаұҜаұҸа°іЩӯЫ° п»ӯпәҚЫ°а·ңа·ҳ п»ӯЩ‘аЎ—аЎІ п»ӯп»ӯпәӯп»ҷ ЭҒЭҜЩҙЮЁп»Ғ ЮҚШҮп»Ҙ а· аә¶ЩӯШө п»ӯп»Ҙ ЩҺЮҷЩӯЪҳ
> 65.4%  0.744  +0.398
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech 26

May 2026 Table 10 вҖ“ continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> Google  ЪўЩҙЬӯ ЭҒШҮ пәҚЭӘЩҙЮ” ЬіШЈЩҙ Ы¬пәҚЮӮЩӯЫ№ аЁҚаІёЪҫ Ьҫп»ӯпәҚЭӘЩҙЮ” ЬіЮЁпә© пәҚп»ӯпә• аҰҶаҘ»ајҹ ЫӢЮҠШө пәҚа§Һа§ҠЩәШҮШҢ ЭҒЮЁа§–а§‘пәҜп»Ў пәӯпәө пә©пәҚа®“аӯҙШҮ пәҚЫұ пәҚЭҝа¬«а¬җпәҚаұҜаұҸа°іЮ¶ п»ӯпәҚа·ңа·ҳ Ы¬п»ӯЩ‘аЎ—аЎІ п»ӯпәӯп»ҷ ЭҒЭҜЩҙЮЁп»ҒЮҚШҮп»Ҙ а· аә¶ЩӯШө п»ӯаӘҰаӘҠ ЩҺЮҷЩӯЪҳ.
> 65.4%  0.754  +0.408
> Azure ЮЁ ЪўЩҙЬӯ ЭҒШҮ пәҚЭӘЩҙЮ” ЬіШЈЩҙЫ° ЮӮЩӯЫ№ аұҜаұҷа°ӯ ЬҫпәҚЭӘЩҙЮ” ЬіЮЁпә©ЮЁпә• аҰҶаҘ»ајҹ ЫӢЮҠШө пәҚаёӣаёҶа§Һа§Ҡ п»ӯа§–а§‘пәҜп»Ў ЩҺШЈаҫҳЭ· пә©пәҚа®“аӯҙШҮ пәғЫұ пәҚЭҝа¬«а¬җпәҚаұҜаұҸа°іЮ¶ п»ӯпәҚЫ°а·ңа·ҳ п»ӯЩ‘аЎ—аЎІ п»ӯп»ӯпәӯп»ҷ ЭҒЮҷЩҙЮЁп»ҒЮҚШҮп»Ҙ а· аә¶ЩӯШө п»ӯаӘҰаӘҠ ЩҺЮҷЩӯЪҳ.
> 69.2%  0.735  +0.427 Persian (Farsi)вҖ“English  (5 samples with highest WERвҖ“BERTScore divergence)
> ЬіЮҡЪ°ШҮ ЪўЩҙЬӯ пәҚпәҜ meeting ЩӢШЈЪҺЫҢШҢ б„Ҡбғі бҲҸбҮ“ШҮЫұ feedback пәӯп»ӯЫҢ пә©пәҚпә©п»Ў бӮӨбҒ–пәӯ Ь”Щ·ЪҶЪҺ.
> ElevenLabs  ЬіЮҡЪ°ШҮ ЩӢЪўЩҙЬӯ пәҚпәҜ meeting ЩӢШЈЪҺЫҢ б„Ҡбғі бҲҸбҮ“ШҮЫұfeedback пәӯп»ӯЫҢ пә©пәҚпә©п»©пәҚп»Ў бӮӨбҒ–пәӯ Ь”Щ·ЪҶЪҺ
> 50.0%  0.887  +0.387
> OpenAI  ЬіЮЁЫҡЮҠШҮп»Ҙ ЩӢШЈЭҘ ЭҒЩӯЬҘ ЭҶб„ҠбғӘ ЩӢШЈЪҺЫҢ пәӯп»ӯЫҢ ЭҝЪ°ЪҶЪҺ ЫұаЈ–аў»ШҮЩһЬӮ пә©пәҚпә©п»Ҙ бӮӨбҒ–пәӯ Ь”Щ·ЪҶЪҺ.
> 75.0%  0.710  +0.460
> Google  ЬіЮҡЪ°ШҮ ЩӢЪўЩҙЬӯ пәҚпәҜ ЭҒЪҶЪҺаЁҚаіӢЬҒ ЩӢШЈЪҺЫҢ пәӯп»ӯЫҢ ЪЈЪҶЪҺЩӢЬӮЫұШҮб„Ҡбғі бҲҸбҮ“ пә©пәҚпә©п»Ў бӮӨбҒ–пәӯ Ь”Щ·ЪҶЪҺ.
> 33.3%  0.863  +0.196
> Azure  ЬіЮҡЪ°ШҮ ЪўЩҙЬӯ пәҚпәҜ ЭҒЪҶаҫҘЪҶЩ·ЬҒ ЩӢШЈЪҺЫҢ пәӯп»ӯЫҢ ЪЈЪҶЪҺЩӢЬӮ ЫұШҮб„Ҡбғі бҲҸбҮ“ пә©пәҚпә©п»Ў бӮӨбҒ–пәӯ Ь”Щ·ЪҶЪҺ.
> 25.0%  0.895  +0.145
> пәҚаЁҚаіӢЪҜЪҺпәӯ Я“ЯөпәҚЫҢ final exam пәҚЭҝа¬«а¬җпәұ пә©пәҚпәӯп»Ў б„Ҡбғі пәҚЭ¬а®“а®Ғ а°Ҳа°ғЪҶЩәЮЁбү•бүғ пәӯп»ӯЫҢ пә©пәӯЭҝШҮп»Ў focus Ь”аЎЎаЎІ.
> ElevenLabs  пәҚаЁҚаіӢЪҜЪҺпәӯ Я“ЯөпәҚЫҢ ЪЈЪҶЩ·ШҮп»қ пәҚа®ја®«пәҚп»Ў пәҚЭҝа¬«а¬җпәұ пә©пәҚпәӯп»Ў б„Ҡбғі пәҚЭ¬а®“а®Ғ а°Ҳа°ғЮіЩ‘ЮЁбү•бүғ пәӯп»ӯЫҢ пә©пәӯпәұЫұШҮп»Ў ЪЈЮЁЬ”Эҙ Ь”аЎЎаЎІ
> 53.8%  0.848  +0.386
> OpenAI  пәҚаЁҚаіӢЪҜЪҺпәӯ Я“ЯөпәҚЫҢ ЪЈШҮаЁҚаіӢШҮп»қ пәҚа®ја®«п»Ў пәҚЭҝа¬«а¬җпәұ пә©пәҚпәӯп»Ў б„Ҡбғі пәҚЭ¬а®“а®Ғ а°Ҳа°ғЮіЩ‘ЮЁбү•бүғ пәӯп»ӯЫҢ пә©пәӯЭҝШҮп»Ў ЪЈЮЁЬ”ЮЁпәұ Ь”аЎЎаЎІ.
> 38.5%  0.883  +0.267
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

27 May 2026 Table 10 вҖ“ continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> Google  пәҚаӘҰаӘӨЪўЪҺпәӯ Я“ЯөпәҚЫҢ ЪЈШҮаЁҚаіӢШҮп»қ пәҚа®ја®«пәҚп»Ў пәҚЭҝа¬«а¬җпәұ пә©пәҚпәӯп»Ў б„Ҡбғі пәҚЭ¬а®“а®ҒЩӢ а°Ҳа°ғЮіЩ‘ЮЁбү•бүғ пәӯп»ӯЫҢ пә©пәӯпәұЫұШҮп»Ў ЪЈЮЁЬ”ЮЁпәұ Ь”аЎЎаЎІ.
> 76.9%  0.876  +0.645
> Azure  пәҚаЁҚаіӢЪҜЪҺпәӯ Я“ЯөпәҚЫҢ ЪЈШҮЩһЬӯаЁіЯҰЯіп»Ў пәҚЭҝа¬«а¬җпәұ пә©пәҚпәӯп»Ў б„Ҡбғі пәҚЭ¬а®“а®Ғ а°Ҳа°ғЪҶЩәЮЁбү•бүғ пәӯп»ӯЫҢ пә©пәӯЭҝШҮп»Ў ЪЈЬҰЭҙ Ь”аЎЎаЎІ.
> 23.1%  0.901  +0.132
> skillаЈ–аЈҺ ЪҺајҘ character аӘҰаӘӨпәҚаЈ–аЈҺ ЫұШҮЫҢ ЫҠЪҶаҰүаҘ» ЫҠЪ°аёһаёғ пә©пәҚпәӯп»©ШҢ ЩӢШҮ ЫӢЩәЭ„ШҮ unlockЩӢ пәҚпәө Ь”аЎЎаЎІ.
> ElevenLabs  ЫҢШҮЫұSkillаЈ–аЈҺ ЪҺајҘ а¬«а¬җпәӯпәҚЬ”бӮӨбҒ– аӘҰаӘӨпәҚ ЫҠЪҶаҰүаҘ» ЫҠЪ°аёһаёғ пә©пәҚпәӯп»© ЩӢШҮ аЈ–аЈҺЫӢЩәЭ„ШҮ Unlockпәө Ь”аЎЎаЎІ
> 53.8%  0.847  +0.385
> OpenAI  пәҚбӮӨбҒ– аӘҰаӘӨпәӯпәҚЬ”ајҘ а¬«а¬җЪҺаЈ–аЈҺ пәҚЭҝаөӘаҙҝЬӯЫұШҮЫҢ ЫҠЪҶаҰүаҘ» ЫҠЪ°аёһаёғ пә©пәҚпәӯп»©ШҢ ЩӢШҮ аЈ–аЈҺЫӢЩәЭ„ШҮ пәҒа°Ҳа°ғЩҺЬ”Э· Ь”аЎЎаЎІ.
> 38.5%  0.859  +0.244
> Google  ЩӢпәҚбӮӨбҒ– аӘҰаӘӨпәӯпәҚЬ”ајҘ а¬«а¬җЪҺаЈ–аЈҺ пәҚЭҝаөӘаҙҝЬӯЫұШҮЫҢ ЫҠЪҶаҰүаҘ» ЫҠЪ°аёһаёғ пә©пәҚпәӯп»© ЩӢШҮ аЈ–аЈҺЫӢЩәЭ„ШҮ пәҒа°Ҳа°ғЩҺЪ©пәҚпәө Ь”аЎЎаЎІ.
> 30.8%  0.844  +0.152
> Azure  ЫұШҮЫҢ ЬӯаөӘаҙҝпәҚЭҝаЈ–аЈҺ ЪҺајҘ а¬«а¬җЬ”а®ҫа®¬ аӘҰаӘӨпәҚ ЫҠЪҶаҰүаҘ» ЫҠЪ° ЭҶпә©пәҚпәӯп»© ЩӢШҮ аЈ–аЈҺЫӢЩәЭ„ШҮ а§–а§‘Ь”Э· Ь”Щ·ЪҺ.
> 61.5%  0.811  +0.426 ЩӢа°Ҳа°ғЭҒбӮӨбҒ– ЭҒЪҶЫӣЮЁпәҚп»Ў weekend аӘҰаӘӨпәҚ movie ШҮЩ‘Ь”аЎЎаЎІ п»ӯ ЫҡЩ·ЪҺ chill ајҘЪҺаҫҹаҪ¶аЈ–аЈҺ ЪҶаЎЎаЎІ.
> ElevenLabs ЩӢ а°Ҳа°ғЭҒбӮӨбҒ– ЫҠЮЁпәҚп»ЎбҲҸбҮ§ weekend аӘҰаӘӨпәҚ ЫҡЪҶЬӯ Ь”аЎЎаЎІ п»ӯ ЫҡЩ·ЪҺ Щ‘ШҮ movie ајҘЪҺаҫҹаҪ¶аЈ–аЈҺ ЪҶаЎЎаЎІ
> 45.5%  0.909  +0.364
> OpenAI  пәҚаӘҰаӘӨ п»ӯ ЩһЬҰЩ·ЪҺ ај ШҮЩҺЮЁпәҚпә©п»©пәҚЭҒЮҚЪҶЮҡШҮаЁҚаІ»ЪҺ п»ӯ ЫҡЩ·ЪҺЩ‘ШҮ бӢӣб”»Э„ЮЁЫҢ ајҘШҮЬіШө аҫұаҪ¶Щ·Щ·ЪҺ.
> 72.7%  0.706  +0.434
> Google  аЈ–аЈҺпәҚаӘҰаӘӨ п»ӯ ЩһЬҰЩ·ЪҺ бҲҸбҮ§ЫҠЮЁпәҚп»Ў бӮӨбҒ–ЭҒа°Ҳа°ғ ЩӢЫҡЪҶЬӯ Ь”аЎЎаЎІ п»ӯ ЫҡЩ·ЪҺ Щ‘ШҮ ЭҒЮЁп»ӯЫҢ ајҘЪҺ аҫҹаҪ¶ЪҶаЎЎаЎІ.
> 63.6%  0.873  +0.510
> Azure Ы¬ пәҚаӘҰаӘӨ п»ӯ ЩһЬҰЩ·ЪҺ ЭҒЪҶЫӣЮЁпәҚп»Ў бӮӨбҒ–ЭҒај° а°Ҳа°ғ Ь”аЎЎаЎІ ЫҡЩ·ЪҺЩ‘ШҮ ЭҒЮЁајҘ бҲҸбҮ“ЪҺаҫҹаҪ¶аЈ–аЈҺ ЪҶаЎЎаЎІ.
> 45.5%  0.820  +0.275
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

28 May 2026 Table 10 вҖ“ continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> аҰүаҘ»ЫҠЪҶаЈ–аЈҺ ЪҺајҘ influencer аӘҰаӘӨпәҚ ШҢЫ¬Ь”Щ· бҲҸбҮ§ Щ‘ЮЁЬіЪҶЪҺ аёһаёҖШҮЬіајҘ content бҶҮбҶ…Ы¬ пәө пәӯп»ӯ пә©аЁҠаІ»ШҮп»қ бҲҸбҮ§Ь”аЎЎаЎІ.
> ElevenLabs  пәҚаӘҰаӘӨ пәҚаЁҚаіӢЪ°Яәа ҠајҘ а№ӨаҪҸаҫўаҪ¬ЪҺаЈ–аЈҺ ЫҠЪҶаҰүаҘ» ајҘ contentШҮЬіаёһаёҖ Щ‘ЮЁЬіЪҶЪҺ ЭҒЪҶЬҰЩ·Ы¬. бҶҮбҶ…Э· пәӯп»ӯ пә©аЁҠаІ»ШҮп»қ ЭҒЪҶЬҰаЎЎаЎІ
> 46.7%  0.857  +0.324
> OpenAI  пәҚаӘҰаӘӨ пәҚаЁҚаіӢЪ°Яәа ҠајҘ а№ӨаҪҸаҫўаҪ¬ЪҺаЈ–аЈҺ ЫҠЪҶаҰүаҘ» аҫҘаҪ№бӮӨбҒ–Щ·ШЁ ајҘШҮЬіаёһаёҖ Щ‘ЮЁЬіЪҶЪҺ бҲҸбҮ§Ь”Щ·Ы¬. бҶҮбҶ…Э· пәӯп»ӯ пә©аЁҠаІ»ШҮп»қ бҲҸбҮ§Ь”аЎЎаЎІ.
> 33.3%  0.876  +0.209
> Google  пәҚаӘҰаӘӨ пәҚаЁҚаіӢЪ°Яәа ҠајҘ а№ӨаҪҸаҫўаҪ¬ЪҺаЈ–аЈҺ ЫҠЪҶаҰүаҘ» аҫҘаҪ№бӮӨбҒ–Щ·ШЁ ајҘШҮЬіаёһаёҖ Щ‘ЮЁЬіЪҶЪҺ бҲҸбҮ§Ь”Щ·Ы¬. бҶҮбҶ…Ы¬ ЮӮ ЮЁпә©аЁҠаІ»ШҮп»қ бҲҸбҮ§ Ь”аЎЎаЎІ.
> 33.3%  0.871  +0.205
> Azure  Ы¬пәҚаӘҰаӘӨ ЩүЬӯЩ·ајҘ а№ӨаҪЎЪҺаЈ–аЈҺ ЫҠЪҶаҰүаҘ» бӮӨбҒ–ЭҒЩ·ШЁ ајҘШҮЬіаёһаёҖ Щ‘ЮЁЬіЪҶЪҺ ЭҒЪҶЬҰЩ· бҶҮбҶ…Э· пәӯпәҚ пә©аЁҠаІ»ШҮп»қ ЭҒЪҶЬҰЩ·Щ·ЪҺ.
> 66.7%  0.836  +0.502 GermanвҖ“English  (5 samples with highest WERвҖ“BERTScore divergence)
> Ich habe nГӨchste Woche einen  appointment  fГјr einen allgemeinen check-up beim Arzt. ElevenLabs  Ich habe nГӨchste Woche ein  Appointment  fГјr einen  allgemeinen Checkup beim Arzt.
> 23.1%  0.946  +0.177
> OpenAI  Ich habe nГӨchste Woche ein  Appointment  fГјr einen  allgemeinen Check-up beim Arzt. 7.7%  0.962  +0.038 Google  Ich habe nГӨchste Woche einen  Appointment  fГјr einen allgemeinen Check-up beim Arzt. 0.0%  0.965  -0.035 Azure  Ich habe nГӨchste Woche einen  appointment fГјr  einen  allgemeinen Checkup beim Arzt.
> 15.4%  0.949  +0.102
> Deepgram  Ich habe nГӨchste Woche ein  Appointment  fГјr einen  allgemeinen Check-up beim Arzt. 7.7%  0.962  +0.038 Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

29 May 2026 Table 10 вҖ“ continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> FГјr das Meeting morgen mГјssen wir die key take-aways  nochmal  genau durchgehen. ElevenLabs  FГјr das Meeting morgen mГјssen wir die Key Take-aways  noch  mal  genau durchgehen.
> 16.7%  0.975  +0.142
> OpenAI  FГјr das Meeting morgen mГјssen wir die Key Take-aways  nochmal  genau durchgehen. 0.0%  0.983  -0.017 Google  FГјr das Meeting morgen mГјssen wir die Key Take-aways  noch  mal  genau durchgehen.
> 16.7%  0.975  +0.142
> Azure  FГјr das Meeting morgen mГјssen wir die Key Tech raise  noch  mal  genau durchgehen.
> 33.3%  0.930  +0.263
> Deepgram  FГјr das Meeting morgen mГјssen wir die Key Take-aways  nochmal  genau durchgehen. 0.0%  0.983  -0.017 My doctor said I need to get a Bluttest to check my iron levels. ElevenLabs  My doctor said I need to get a blood test to check my iron levels.
> 14.3%  0.967  +0.110
> OpenAI  My doctor said I need to get a blood test to check my iron levels.
> 14.3%  0.967  +0.110
> Google  My doctor said I need to get a blood test to check my iron levels.
> 14.3%  0.967  +0.110
> Azure  My Doctor. I need to get a blood test to check my iron levels.
> 21.4%  0.913  +0.128
> Deepgram  My doctor said I need to get a blood test to check my iron levels.
> 14.3%  0.967  +0.110
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

30 May 2026 Table 10 вҖ“ continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> Wir haben ein Upgrade auf eine Suite mit king-size bed und tollem sea view bekommen. ElevenLabs  Wir  haben  ein  Up-grade  auf  eine  Suite mit  Kingsize-Bett  und tollem Sea View bekom-men.
> 18.8%  0.917  +0.105
> OpenAI  Wir haben ein Upgrade auf  eine  Suite  mit Kingsize-Bett und Dorm Sea View bekommen.
> 25.0%  0.889  +0.139
> Google  Wir haben ein Upgrade auf  eine  Suite  mit Kingsize-Bett und Dolm Sea View bekommen.
> 25.0%  0.891  +0.141
> Azure  Wir haben ein Upgrade auf eine Suite mit King Size Bad. Dorm C View become an.
> 37.5%  0.821  +0.196
> Deepgram  Wir haben ein Upgrade auf eine Suite mit King-size Bett und Dorm Sea View bekommen. 12.5%  0.926  +0.051 We should plan a proper Kaffeeklatsch soon, with lots  of  cake  and  extra Sahne. ElevenLabs  We should plan a proper coffee klatch soon, with lots  of  cake  and  extra Sahne. 14.3%  0.949  +0.092 OpenAI  We  should  planen  aproper  Kaffeeklatsch soon,  with lots of cake and extra Sahne. 7.1%  0.980  +0.051 Google  We should plan a proper coffee klatsch soon with a lot of cake and extra Sahne.
> 28.6%  0.928  +0.214
> Azure  We should plГӨne proper kaffee klatscht duon with a lots of cake and extra sahne.
> 42.9%  0.823  +0.252
> Continued on next page
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

31 May 2026 Table 10 вҖ“ continued  

> Reference  Model  Hypothesis  WER  BERT  вҲҶ
> Deepgram  We should plan a proper Kaffeeklatch soon,  with lots  of  cake  and  extra Sahne. 7.1%  0.994  +0.065
> Benchmarking Commercial ASR Systems on Code-Switching Speech

32