Title: From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation via  Knowledge-Aware Dual Rewriting and Reasoning

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=PAjCdkkNaU

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation via Knowledge-Aware Dual Rewriting and Reasoning 

Jinyu Wang * 1 Jingjing Fu * 1 Rui Wang 1 Lei Song 1 Jiang Bian 1

# Abstract 

Recent advancements in Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems have significantly en-hanced the capabilities of large language models (LLMs) by incorporating external knowledge re-trieval. However, the sole reliance on retrieval is often inadequate for mining deep, specialized knowledge and performing the logical reasoning necessary to tackle domain-specific complex ques-tions. To address these challenges, we present an approach, which is designed to extract, com-prehend, and utilize specialized knowledge in an atomic manner while simultaneously construct-ing a coherent rationale. At the heart of our approach lie four pivotal components: a knowl-edge atomizer that extracts atomic tags from raw data, a query proposer that generates subsequent questions to facilitate the original inquiry, an atomic retriever that locates knowledge based on atomic knowledge alignments, and an atomic selector that determines which atomic tag and chunk pair to query, guided by the retrieved in-formation. Through this approach, we imple-ment a knowledge-aware task decomposition strat-egy that iteratively builds the rationale in align-ment with the initial question and the acquired knowledge. We conduct comprehensive experi-ments to demonstrate the efficacy of our approach across various benchmarks, particularly those re-quiring multihop reasoning steps. A substantial performance improvement of up to +10.1 (20.4%) over the second-best method underscores the po-tential of the approach in complex, knowledge-intensive applications. The code is publicly avail-able at https://github.com/microsoft/PIKE-RAG. 

> *

Equal contribution 1Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China. Correspondence to: Lei Song <lesong@microsoft.com >.

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s). 

Figure 1. Complex questions are typically decomposed into sub-questions following either a chain-shaped or tree-shaped path, with chunk retrieval used to gather relevant information for resolution. Unlike previous approaches, our method seamlessly integrate the question decomposition with information retrieval through atomic knowledge alignment by dual rewriting upon questions and chunks, and dynamically determine follow-up sub-questions by atomic pair retrieval and selection, enabling an adaptive and interactive decomposition path that evolves based on the retrieved knowledge. 

# 1. Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized the field of natural language processing by demonstrating the capability to generate coherent and contextually relevant text and the versatility to execute a diverse spectrum of lin-guistic tasks, ranging from text completion to translation and summarization (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). Despite their broad capabilities, LLMs exhibit pro-nounced limitations when tasked with specialized queries in professional domains (Ling et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023a). This primarily arises from the scarcity of domain-specific training material (e.g., unpublished documents ) and an in-complete understanding of specialized knowledge and ratio-nale within these domains (e.g., industry-specific acronyms, company-specific operational rules ). As a result, LLMs may produce responses that are not only potentially erro-neous but also lack the detail and precision required for expert-level engagement (Bender et al., 2021). 1From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation   

> Figure 2. Case demonstration of Self-Ask and KAR 3. By proposing multiple atomic queries, KAR 3effectively retrieves the relevant knowledge chunk, whereas the single deterministic follow-up question approach employed by Self-Ask fails to align with the knowledge base’s schema, resulting in a retrieval failure.

To mitigate these issues, RAG (Lewis et al., 2020) has emerged as a promising solution, augmenting LLMs with external knowledge retrieval to anchor generated content. By supplementing or even replacing the knowledge encoded within LLMs, RAG frameworks aim to improve factual-ity and relevance. However, existing RAG systems often struggle with domain-specific complex tasks. For example, answering a query like “ please provide the product name of the latest biosimilar for HUMIRA that has been suc-cessfully approved. ” requires more than retrieving scattered specialized knowledge (e.g., biosimilar for HUMIRA ) from multiple sources. It demands logical reasoning on eligible products and their approval timelines to synthesize a precise and reliable response. Current RAG methods predominantly rely on plain text retrieval, which may fail to effectively capture correlations within domain-specific expression, and often employ question decomposition without considering available knowledge, leading to suboptimal sub-question generation, ineffective retrieval and reasoning failures. In this work, we argue that advancing RAG requires knowledge-aware processing, especially on question decom-position and information retrieval, and iterative reasoning to effectively address complex, multi-step questions in pro-fessional domains. 

Knowledge-aware Processing for Domain-Specific Com-prehension Addressing complex, logic-driven tasks in spe-cialized domains requires knowledge extraction and com-prehension to deeply understand both the user’s information needs and the underlying context of the retrieved data. For example, specialized questions in fields like medicine, law, or finance often involve domain-specific terminology and logic, which generic LLMs may fail to grasp fully. Tra-ditional RAG systems that retrieve text passages based on keyword matching (Ram et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023) or embedding similarity (Gao et al., 2023) may retrieve contextually relevant information, that may lack semantic precision, insufficient for answering intricate questions. 

Iterative Reasoning for Complex Query Resolution Com-plex reasoning tasks, where the answer depends on synthe-sizing information from multiple sources, demand the de-composition of the original question into a series of simpler, interrelated sub-questions (Press et al., 2023). Nonethe-less, this approach may face obstacles in domains where the knowledge is not readily accessible to LLMs. We argue that the decomposition in such domains should be contextual, rather than a standalone operation, meaning that decom-posed queries can be answered with the retrieved knowledge and context progressively and evolve into refining subse-quent queries. This iterative approach allows the system to evolve its understanding of the user’s inquiry, ensuring that follow-up questions are informed by the most recent retrieval results. 2From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

We introduce a novel framework, KAR 3-RAG, which em-ploys a knowledge-aware dual rewriting and reasoning mechanism. Our approach features a dynamic interaction between question rewriting and knowledge retrieval, en-abling the system to adaptively refine both the query and the retrieved context at each iteration, as illustrated in Fig-ure 1. The core components of our system include Knowl-edge atomizer, decomposing raw data into atomic tags for more granular retrieval, Query proposer, generating follow-up questions based on the evolving context, Atomic re-triever, identifying and retrieving relevant knowledge based on atomic knowledge alignments, and Atomic selector, de-termining the most relevant follow-up questions based on the retrieved information. More specially, the atomic tags are formulated as relevant inquiries that can be answered by the given chunk, thereby encompassing the multifaceted knowledge of the chunk and facilitating effective retrieval. Atomic query proposals are raised to inquiry the knowledge that is helpful to answer the question better. By leverag-ing these components, our system can iteratively refine its understanding of both the question and the retrieved knowl-edge, enabling more accurate and context-aware reasoning over multiple hops. We demonstrate the advantages of task decomposition and atomic retrieval on a real-world case, as shown in Figure 2. Our approach not only enables multi-faceted task decomposition, but also alleviates the misalign-ment between the corpus formulation and the query through atomic tagging of the corpus. Our key contributions are as follows: 1) We propose a knowledge-aware RAG framework that incorporates re-trieved knowledge into question decomposition, enabling iterative exploration of the reasoning path. 2) We introduce an atomic knowledge alignment approach by dual writing that tightly couples query decomposition with retrieval, sig-nificantly improving retrieval efficiency. 3) We report on comprehensive experimental and ablation studies that vali-date the superior performance of our approach across mul-tiple benchmark datasets, achieving up to 20.4% increase over the second-best method. 

# 2. Related work 

2.1. RAG 

RAG has emerged as a promising solution that effectively incorporates external knowledge to improve the generation of LLMs. Naive RAG systems retrieve pertinent informa-tion from external data sources and integrate it into the context of the question prompt as supplementing knowl-edge for contextually relevant generation (Ram et al., 2023). Advanced RAG approaches implement specific enhance-ments across the pre-retrieval, retrieval, and post-retrieval processes, including query optimization (Ma et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023), multi-granularity chunking (Chen et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2024), mixed retrieval (Yang, 2023) and re-ranking (Cohere, 2023). On one hand, efforts focus on query rewriting, either explicitly (Zheng et al., 2024) or implicitly (Gao et al., 2022), to enhance retrieval perfor-mance. On the other hand, several studies transform raw data sources into structured data, ultimately converting them into valuable knowledge for more effective retrieval and rea-soning (Wang et al., 2023b; Zheng et al., 2024; Raina & Gales, 2024; Liang et al., 2024). In our system, we intro-duce atomic rewriting for both queries and chunks, which achieves multi-granularity question decomposition and com-prehensively extract inherent knowledge from chunks. To tackle complex tasks such as summarization (Hayashi et al., 2021) and multihop reasoning (Ho et al., 2020), re-cent research focuses on developing advanced coordination schemes that leverage existing RAG modules to collabora-tively address these challenges. Iter-RetGen (Shao et al., 2023) and DSP (Khattab et al., 2023) employ retrieve-read iteration to leverage generation response as the context for next round retrieval. FLARE (Jiang et al., 2023) proposes a confidence-based active retrieval mechanism. Our approach adopts an iteration-based pipeline that leverages context-aware reasoning process, enabling the adaptive formulation of follow-up questions for each iteration and reducing the difficulty of retrieval and reasoning of complex tasks. 

2.2. Multihop QA 

Multihop Question Answering (MHQA) (Yang et al., 2018) require reasoning over multiple pieces of information, often scattered across different sources. This task presents unique challenges as it necessitates not only retrieving relevant information but also effectively combining and reasoning over the retrieved pieces to arrive at a correct answer. The traditional graph-based methods in MHQA solves the prob-lem by building graphs and inferring on graph neural net-works(GNN) to predict answers (Qiu & other authors, 2019; Fang & other authors, 2020). With the advent of LLMs, recent graph-based methods (Li & Du, 2023; Panda et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024) have evolved to construct KGs for retrieval and generate response through LLMs. However, constructing a high-quality domain-specific KG is costly, and the structured triple format imposes inherent constraints on contextual representation, limiting its expressiveness. Self-RAG (Zhang et al., 2024a)and beam-retrieval (Asai et al., 2023) treating MHQA as a supervised problem, ne-cessitating labeled data and additional training. Another branch of methods decomposes multihop ques-tions into sub-questions following either a chain-shaped path (Trivedi et al., 2023; Khattab et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2024) or tree-shaped path (Zhang et al., 2024b; Jiapeng et al., 2024; Cao et al., 2023), as depicted in Figure 1. The sub-questions guide sequential chunk re-3From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation   

> Figure 3. Overview of the KAR 3-RAG workflow, illustrating knowledge atomizing by the atomizer, and knowledge-aware task decompo-sition using the query proposer, atomic retrieval and atomic selector. The query proposer generates atomic query proposals based on the original question and reference context. These proposals are used to retrieve the relevant atomic tags, producing retrieved atomic pairs. The atomic selector chooses the most relevant pair and the corresponding chunk, which is added to the reference context for task decomposition in the subsequent iteration. Once the atomic selector determines that no further information is required and no atomic pair is selected, the original question and reference context are passed to the generator to produce the final answer.

trieval, with the retrieved results subsequently facilitating the reasoning process. In chain-shaped decomposition, a single sub-question is generated, and its answer availability is not guaranteed, potentially leading to answer failure. In contrast, tree-shaped decomposition requires exploring mul-tiple reasoning paths, necessitating sophisticated evidence verification and fusion for final response generation. Our approach explore the reasoning path by interactively select the sub-question from a set of query proposals based on the relevance of atomic retrieval. This allows for flexible decomposition by leveraging updated context and selecting query proposals with available knowledge. 

# 3. Methodology 

3.1. Preliminary 

In a RAG system, the textual corpus is divided into a collec-tion of document chunks, denoted as D = {d1, d 2, . . . , d n},where di represents the i-th document chunk. The original question is denoted as q, and its corresponding ground truth answer is represented by a. The retrieval phase involves evaluating the similarity between the question q and each document chunk di, after which the top-k most relevant chunks are selected as retrieval results, forming the basis for subsequent generation. 

R : topk 

> di∈D

Sim (q, d i) → Dq (1) Here, the retriever R selects the top-k most relevant chunks 

Dq based on the similarity function Sim (·). Finally, the original question and retrieved chunks are fed into the large language model to generate the answer, denoted as 

ˆa = LLM (q, D q ). In the advanced RAG systems, query rewriting is employed to bridge the semantic gap between the question and the chunks to be retrieved. The rewritten query is represented as ˆq = fre (q). The workflow of the advanced RAG system is further improved as follows, 

ˆa = LLM (q, D ˆq ), where Dˆq = R(ˆ q, D) (2) This enhancement allows the system to better align queries with relevant document chunks, enhancing retrieval accu-racy and answer generation. However, addressing complex multihop questions remains challenging. These questions often require reasoning across multiple chunks and inte-grating information through several retrieval and generation steps-a process that a single pass may not fully capture. 

3.2. Framework 

To address complex multihop questions, we introduce an enhanced RAG system with Knowledge-Aware dual Rewriting and Reasoning, termed as KAR 3. This system employs an iterative retrieval-reasoning-generation mech-anism that facilitates gradual collection of relevant infor-mation and progressive reasoning over incremental context. An overview of the proposed workflow is depicted in Fig-ure 3. In our framework, raw data chunks are broken down into atomic tags using a knowledge atomizer to construct an atomic knowledge base for the subsequent retrieval. Ques-tions are similarly atomized by a query proposer to generate atomic query proposals, which are utilized to retrieve the relevant atomic tags from the knowledge base. Both chunks and questions are rewritten to bridge the semantic gap and improve the alignment of knowledge. An atomic retriever then selects the top-k atomic pairs for each atomic query proposal. Based on these retrieved atomic pairs, an atomic selector, as a reasoner, identifies the most useful atomic pair 4From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

for problem-solving and adds the corresponding raw chunk to the context. This context is then aggregated with the original question for the task decomposition in next itera-tion. The iteration process may terminate earlier if it fails to retrieve suitable atomic tags, either due to the genera-tion of low-quality query proposals or the lack of relevant atomic tag candidates. At this point, the original question and context are passed to the generator to produce the final answer. 

3.3. Knowledge Atomizing 

Chunked text often contains multifaceted information, and typically, only a subset is needed to address a specific task. Traditional information retrieval methods, which consoli-date all information within a single chunk may not facilitate the efficient retrieval of the precise information required. Recent research have explored the extraction of triple knowl-edge units from chunked text and constructing knowledge graphs to facilitate efficient information retrieval (Edge et al., 2024; Panda et al., 2024). However, the construction of these knowledge graphs is costly, and the inherent knowledge may not always be fully explored. To better present the knowl-edge embedded in documents, we propose atomizing the original documents for knowledge extraction, a process we refer as Knowledge Atomizing . This approach leverage the context understanding and content generation capabilities of LLMs to automatically tag atomic knowledge pieces within each document chunk. The presentation of the atomic knowledge can be vari-ous. Instead of utilizing declarative sentences or subject-relationship-object tuples, we propose using questions as knowledge indexes to further bridge the gap between stored knowledge and queries. In knowledge atomizing process, we input the document chunk to an LLM as context, ask it to generate relevant questions that can be answered by the given chunk as many as possible. These generated atomic tags are stored together with the given chunks. The knowl-edge atomizer applies atomizing operation on each chunk. 

fa(dk) = {qk1, q k2, · · · , q km } (3) The atomic tags are generated by atomizer for every chunk, forming an atomic knowledge base, denoted as KB =

{fa(dk), d k}. An example of knowledge atomizing is il-lustrated in Figure 4(a), where the atomic tags encapsulate various aspects of the knowledge contained within the chunk. Since each chunk is tagged with multiple atomic tags, an atomic query can be used to locate relevant atomic tags, which then leads to the associated reference chunks. 

3.4. Knowledge-Aware Task Decomposition 

Addressing complex multihop questions often requires in-tegrating multiple pieces of knowledge, which implicitly 

Algorithm 1 Task Solving with Knowledge-Aware Decom-position  

> 1:

Initialize context C0 ← ϕϕϕ 

> 2:

for t = 1 , 2, . . . , N do  

> 3:

Generate atomic query proposals ˆqt ← fp(q, Ct−1) 

> 4:

Retrieve top-k atomic pairs for each atomic query proposal from knowledge base 

P ˆqt KB 

←−− R atom (ˆqt, f a(D))  

> 5:

Select the most useful atomic tag or None when additional information is unnecessary 

qksls ← LLM (q, Ct−1, P ˆqt

) 

> 6:

if qksls is None then  

> 7:

Ct ← C t−1 

> 8:

break  

> 9:

else  

> 10:

Fetch the relevant chunk ct corresponding to qksls 

> 11:

Update context Ct ← C t−1 ∪ ct 

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

Generate answer ˆa ← LLM (q, Ct)

demands the ability to break down the original question into several sequential or parallel atomic tags for retrieval. We re-fer to this operation as Task Decomposition . By combining the extracted atomic knowledge with the original chunks, we construct an atomic knowledge base. Each time a task is decomposed, the atomic knowledge base provides insights into the available knowledge, enabling knowledge-aware task decomposition. We design the Knowledge-Aware Task Decomposition workflow, and the complete algorithm for solving task is detailed in Algorithm 1, and an example is illustrated in Figure 4(b). Initially, the reference context C0 is initialized as an empty set. In the first iteration, task decomposition relies solely on the original question to generate atomic query proposals. As iterations progress, the accumulated context at t-th iteration denoted as Ct−1, consists of chunks retrieved from previous iterations. During the t-th iteration, the query proposer gen-erates atomic query proposals based on the original question and the accumulated context. 

fp(q, Ct−1) = {ˆqt

> 1

, ˆqt

> 2

, · · · , ˆqtn} (4) The query proposer fp(·) can be implemented as either an LLM or a learnable component. we leverage an LLM to gen-erate query proposals that are potentially beneficial for task completion, represented as ˆqt={ˆqti }. During this process, the selected reference chunks Ct−1 are provided as con-5From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

Figure 4. Illustrative examples of KAR 3-RAG cases: (a) Example of knowledge atomizing, (b) RAG case with knowledge-aware task decomposition. As iterations progress, the reference context is enriched by accumulating relevant chunks via atomic retrieval and selection. With the expansion of context, the number of atomic query proposals generated decreases until no further proposals are produced. Subsequently, the iteration process terminates, and the combined question and context are harnessed to produce the final response. 

text to avoid generating proposals linked to already known knowledge. Consequently, the query proposals evolve with each iteration, adapting to the updated context and aiming to explore additional knowledge beyond chunks in the context. For each atomic query proposal, we retrieve its top-k rele-vant atomic tag candidates along with their source chunks from the knowledge base. The atomic retrieval process is: 

Ratom : topk 

> qkl ∈fa(D)

Sim (ˆ qti , q kl ) KB 

−−→ P ˆqti (5) where the atomic retriever, denoted as Ratom , produces a set of retrieved atomic pairs for each atomic query proposal, represented as P ˆqti = {(ˆ qti , q kili , d ki )}. All the retrieved atomic pairs from each atomic query proposal are aggre-gated to generate an overall set P ˆqt

. We employ cosine similarity of the corresponding embeddings to retrieve the top-k atomic tags, provided their similarity to a proposed atomic tag meets or exceeds a specified threshold δ. With the original question, the accumulated context, and the list of retrieved atomic pairs, the atomic selector employ an LLM to select the most useful atomic pair for problem-solving. 

LLM (q, Ct−1, P ˆqt

) = (ˆ qts, q ksls , d ks ) (6) The atomic selector, denoted as Satom , further retrieve the relevant raw chunk of the atomic pair selected as the new context added in the t-th iteration, denoted as ct. This chunk corresponds to dks in equation 6. The chunk retrieval 6From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

process can be represented by the following formula, 

ct = Satom (Ratom (fp(q, Ct−1), f a(D)))) (7) This retrieved chunk is aggregated into the reference con-text for the next round of decomposition, expressed as 

Ct = ct ∪ C t−1. Knowledge-aware decomposition can it-erate up to N times, where N is a hyperparameter set to control computational cost. The iteration process may con-clude earlier if it fails to retrieve suitable atomic tags, either due to the generation of low-quality query proposals or the absence of relevant atomic tag candidates. Alternatively, the process can be halted if the LLM deems the accumu-lated knowledge adequate for task completion. This early termination mechanism allows the process to conclude be-fore completing all iterations, reducing computational costs without compromising accuracy. Finally, the accumulated context Ct is utilized to generate answer ˆa for the given question q in line 1. It is worth mentioning that knowledge-aware decomposition can be a learnable component. For each specialized knowl-edge base, we can utilize the data collected in each decompo-sition iteration—specifically (q, a, ˆa, {ˆqts, c t, ˆqt, P ˆqt

, Ct}).This trained proposer can then directly suggest atomic queries qt during inference, which means lines 1 to 1 in Algorithm 1 can be replaced by a single call to this learned proposer, thereby reducing both inference time and com-putational cost. We leave the exploration of training an efficient query proposer as future work. 

# 4. Evaluation and Metrics 

Since KAR 3 is proposed to handle the challenges in special-ized domains, we have conducted experiments on both a Chinese legal benchmark named LawBench and the Open Australian Legal QA benchmark. The experimental results demonstrated that KAR 3 have obtained significantly im-provement than baseline methods across all these bench-marks, and the accuracy on generation tasks can reach up to 90.12% and 98.59% in LawBench and Australian Legal QA respectively. The detailed introduction to these legal benchmarks and the experimental results can be found in Appendix A.8. To better compare the proposed approach with baseline methods, we focus on the widely-recognized open-domain benchmarks in this section. Section 4.1 and 4.2 outline the experimental setup and the primary experimental results respectively. Ablation studies are discussed in Section 4.3. Additionally, cost analysis and case studies are included in Appendix A.5 and A.6 due to content constraints. 

4.1. Experimental Setup Methods To thoroughly evaluate the performance of our proposed knowledge-aware decomposition approach, we have selected a variety of baseline methods that represent different strategies for task-solving with LLMs. We in-clude Zero-Shot CoT (Kojima et al., 2022) to assess the inherent reasoning capabilities and built-in knowledge of the underlying LLM without any additional context. Naive RAG (Lewis et al., 2020), which introduces external knowl-edge through retrieval, serves as a benchmark for evaluating the incremental benefits of augmented knowledge. The 

Self-Ask framework (Press et al., 2023) is employed to investigate the impact of an iterative question decompo-sition and answering strategy on task performance. The 

IRCoT (Trivedi et al., 2023), which iteratively generates the rationale to process the multihop questions, along with the Iter-RetGen (Shao et al., 2023), which iteratively uses the recent response as a retrieval query to improve the re-sponse quality, and the ProbTree (Cao et al., 2023), which explicitly decompose the complex QA into a search tree, are also conducted for performance comparison. Detailed descriptions of methods are provided in Appendix A.4. In our experiments, we employ GPT-4 (1106-Preview) and Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct across the methods outlined previ-ously. For the experiments presented in Section 4.2, the iteration number N is set to 5 for Self-Ask with Retrieval, IRCoT, Iter-RetGen and KAR 3. Additionally, the atomic retriever is initialized with k = 4 and δ = 0 .5. A compre-hensive list of hyper-parameters for the retrieval and LLM can be found in Appendix A.3. For brevity, Llama-3.1-70B-Instruct is abbreviated as Llama 3 in the following content. 

Metrics To ensure consistency with established bench-marks, we adopt F1 as a conventional metric in our ex-perimental evaluation. To more accurately assess the the alignment of responses with the intended answers—beyond mere lexical matching—we introduce a novel evaluation metric employing GPT-4 . In this process, GPT-4 acts as an evaluator, assessing the correctness of a response in relation to the question and the correct answer labels. We refer to this metric as Accuracy (Acc) . Upon manual inspection of a sample set, the judgments rendered by GPT-4 demonstrate complete agreement with human evaluators, affirming the reliability of this metric. Furthermore, a full evaluation re-sults with Exact Match (EM), Recall and Precision can be found in Appendix A.4. 

Datasets To better compare with baseline methods, our evaluation focuses on three widely-recognized multihop datasets: HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), 2WikiMulti-HopQA (Ho et al., 2020), and MuSiQue (Trivedi et al., 2022). A brief introduction to these datasets can be found in Appendix A.1. For each dataset, we randomly sample 7From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

Table 1. Performance comparison on multihop QA datasets with GPT-4. Best in bold, second-best underlined.                                                    

> Method HotpotQA 2Wiki MuSiQue F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc Zero-Shot CoT 43.94 53.60 41.40 43.87 22.90 23.47 Naive RAG 72.67 82.60 59.74 62.80 43.31 44.40 Self-Ask w/ R. 71.40 80.00 69.06 75.00 46.76 51.40 IRCoT 67.30 81.00 63.83 70.40 47.57 49.20 Iter-RetGen 75.27 86.60 67.21 73.60 52.48 55.60 ProbTree 62.41 73.40 69.42 80.00 43.26 52.86 KAR 3(Ours) 76.48 88.00 75.00 82.20 57.86 62.60

Table 2. Performance comparison on multihop QA datasets with Llama 3. Best in bold, second-best underlined.                                              

> Method HotpotQA 2Wiki MuSiQue F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc Zero-Shot CoT 40.10 54.80 38.54 43.20 15.69 19.80 Naive RAG 70.78 84.20 56.58 62.20 32.53 36.40 Self-Ask w/ R. 70.25 83.00 66.25 74.00 38.19 44.20 IRCoT 74.59 88.00 69.49 77.60 43.12 49.60 Iter-RetGen 72.23 85.20 59.21 65.00 37.16 40.40 KAR 3(Ours) 75.27 88.20 72.79 81.00 50.68 59.70

500 QA data from the dev set, disregarding the question type and the number of hops to ensure randomness. We compile the context paragraphs from all sampled QA data into a single knowledge base for each benchmark, creat-ing a more complex retrieval scenario. This design choice aims to rigorously assess the task decomposition and rele-vant context retrieval capabilities of our model. For brevity, 2WikiMultiHopQA is abbreviated as 2Wiki. 

4.2. Main Results 

As demonstrated in Table 1 and Table 2 1, our approach achieves superior performance across all datasets with both GPT-4 and Llama 3. Specifically, with GPT-4, we observe increases of approximately +1 .4(1 .6%) , +2 .2(2 .8%) , and 

+7 .0(12 .6%) in accuracy over the second-best results for HotpotQA, 2Wiki, and MuSiQue. Similarly, with Llama 3, we achieve increases of +0 .2(0 .2%) , +3 .4(4 .4%) , and 

+10 .1(20 .4%) for three datasets, respectively. These en-hancements are statistically significant, underscoring the robustness of KAR 3 in handling complex QA tasks. Our proposed approach, KAR 3, emphasizes knowledge-aware task decomposition and differs from the spontaneous decomposition mechanism reliant on given demonstrations, as employed by Self-Ask. It performs decomposition with an awareness of available knowledge and effectively uses atomic tags as an intermediate medium to bridge the se-

> 1

Since we encountered problem obtaining the logprobs from the Llama 3 endpoint, we leave the experiment of ProbTree with Llama 3 as future work. 

mantic gap. The “proposal first, then select” framework, detailed in Algorithm 1, enables a dynamic decomposition path search, provides an opportunity to validate the intent of the question and rectify potential errors in the historical rationale generation process. A practical application of this point can be seen in Case(a) of Appendix A.6. Consequently, the experimental results demonstrate that KAR 3 consistently outperforms other methods with different models, validating not only its effectiveness but only its robustness and adapt-ability for different models in complex reasoning scenarios. 

4.3. Ablation Study The selection of N . We first conducted experiments with the iteration upper bound N set to 1, 2, . . . 10 , and the results are presented in Figure 5. Detailed performance metrics are available in Table 8 of Appendix A.4. Across all three datasets, there is a consistent uptrend in both Supporting Fact Recall and Answer Accuracy. This pattern underscores the approach’s capability to incrementally enhance its out-puts through additional iterations, particularly when more detailed and contextually relevant information is required to address problem. Additionally, upon examining the relationship between the number of iterations and the observed growth in supporting fact recall, we note that for HotPotQA and 2Wiki datasets, the recall curves exhibit a pronounced increase up to the fourth iteration. Conversely, the recall for the MuSiQue dataset continues to rise sharply beyond this point, even though the maximum number of hops per question is capped at four, as mentioned in Appendix A.1. This discrepancy implies that while KAR 3 is adept at retrieving relevant and useful information within a limited number of iterations, it still has certain limitation: KAR 3 relies on the reasoning capability of the used LLM, and further iterations may be re-quired to fully capture the necessary information, especially as the complexity of the questions increases. Although Algorithm 1 does incorporate early-stopping mechanisms, a higher N invariably leads to increased com-putational demands. Therefore, we choose N = 5 - a value slightly above the maximum number of hops - for the exper-iments in Section 4.2 to achieve a delicate balance between computational resources and the expected enhancement in performance. 

Figure 5. Supporting fact recall (in blue) and answer accuracy (in orange) over iterations. 

8From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation                                                      

> Table 3. Ablation study of the components in KAR 3.
> Variable Component Modification HotpotQA 2Wiki MuSiQue F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc Knowledge Atomizer Atomizing to questions →Atomizing to plain texts 73.05 84.50 64.18 69.80 50.72 55.20 Query Proposer Proposing multiple queries →Proposing a single query 75.06 85.60 70.19 76.40 49.67 52.20 Atomic Retriever Retrieving (atomic tag, chunk) pairs →Retrieving chunks 76.31 86.60 67.14 72.40 49.05 53.00 Atomic Selector Selecting chunks by atomic tags →Selecting chunks directly 72.80 83.20 61.65 65.80 49.31 53.40 KAR 3(Ours) 76.48 88.00 75.00 82.20 57.86 62.60

The contribution of the approach components. KAR 3 is comprised of four key components: a knowledge atomizer, a query proposer, an atomic retriever, and an atomic selector. We conduct ablation studies to ascertain the individual and collective contributions of these components. by introducing several method variants with modification to these components one by one: (1) For the knowledge at-omizer, we change the atomic tag presentation from atomic questions to plain text sentences to explore the influence of atomic knowledge representation; (2) For the query pro-poser, we limit it to generate only one query to evaluate the advantage of the originally designed multiple proposals mechanism; (3) For the atomic retriever, we modified the components to let it retrieve chunks rather than (atomic tag, chunk) pairs; (4) For the atomic selector, instead of filtering chunks by atomic tags, we implemented a variant to select chunks directly. Since there is no atomic tag existing in this setting, the context selection is later determined by the chunk directly. As evidenced by the results in Table 3, the individual contri-butions of the components were evaluated. We observed that replacing the knowledge atomizer, query proposer, atomic retriever and atomic selector with their substitutes will lead to accuracy reductions up to 15.1%, 16.6%, 15.3% and 16.2%, respectively, over three datasets. These ablation studies imply that each designed component is crucial for achieving optimal retrieval performance and coherent rea-soning traces. 

Limitation Discussion. Beyond the need for additional iterations to extract crucial information for complex ques-tions, our experiments with GPT-3.5 - detailed in Table 9 in Appendix A.4 - indicate a limitation in relying on LLMs’ reasoning capabilities. With GPT-3.5, the performance of KAR 3 does not significantly surpass that of methods like IRCoT and Self-Ask w/ Retrieval and occasionally falls short compared to Self-Ask w/ Retrieval. This highlights that KAR 3’s success hinges on its advanced reasoning skills and its ability to robustly follow complex instructions. While the experimental results using the open-source model Llama 3 demonstrate a notable performance improvement over the baseline methods, our approach requires higher token consumption compared to some of the methods evalu-ated, as detailed in Table 10 in Appendix A.5. Specifically, on MuSiQue, it uses fewer tokens than ProbTree and IR-CoT, but more than Iter-RetGen and Self-Ask with retrieval. This increased token usage could lead to higher costs when implemented with proprietary models like GPT-4. 

# 5. Conclusion 

We present an advanced RAG system, enhanced with knowledge-aware dual rewriting and reasoning capabilities, designed to improve knowledge extraction and rationale formulation within specialized datasets. The comprehen-sive results of extensive experiments underscore the efficacy of our approach, particularly in scenarios involving bench-marks with multihop questions. For future work, we aim to refine the system’s proficiency through the integration of in-context learning (Wei et al., 2022), by adaptively select-ing demonstrations for the query proposer. This will further enhance its ability to perform knowledge-aware question rewriting. Additionally, we are interested in developing a knowledge-aware atomizer capable of incorporating feed-back from sample questions, thereby improving its under-standing of the most beneficial types of atomic knowledge. 

# Impact Statement 

Our approach utilizes existing large language models to avoid additional training and minimize the introduction of new biases, generating responses from pre-processed knowl-edge base to ensure reliability. The process records each step of question decomposition, creating a transparent and interpretable reasoning chain, and can be privately deployed to enhance data security in sensitive environments. This approach advances the use of Retrieval-Augmented Gener-ation (RAG) technology in fields like legal research, medi-cal diagnostics, and technical support, improving decision-making quality and efficiency. The enhanced clarity, pre-cision, and logical coherence of information could lead to better healthcare outcomes, more accurate legal judgments, and improved technical assistance, contributing significantly to societal well-being and progress. 9From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

# References 

Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F., Almeida, D., Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S., Anadkat, S., et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. Asai, A., Wu, Z., Wang, Y., Sil, A., and Hajishirzi, H. Self-rag: Learning to retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2310.11511 .Bender, E. M., Gebru, T., McMillan-Major, A., and Mitchell, M. On the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Con-ference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency ,pp. 610–623. ACM, 2021. Butler, U. Open australian legal qa, 2023. URL 

https://huggingface.co/datasets/ umarbutler/open-australian-legal-qa .Cao, S., Zhang, J., Shi, J., Lv, X., Yao, Z., Tian, Q., Li, J., and Hou, L. Probabilistic tree-of-thought reasoning for answering knowledge-intensive complex questions. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13982 , 2023. Chen, T., Wang, H., Chen, S., Yu, W., Ma, K., Zhao, X., Zhang, H., and Yu, D. Dense x retrieval: What retrieval granularity should we use? arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06648 , 2023. URL https://arxiv. org/pdf/2312.06648.pdf .Cohere. Say goodbye to irrelevant search results: Co-here rerank is here. https://txt.cohere.com/ rerank/ , 2023. Accessed: 2023-08-28. Edge, D., Trinh, H., Cheng, N., Bradley, J., Chao, A., Mody, A., Truitt, S., and Larson, J. From local to global: A graph rag approach to query-focused summarization, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.16130 .Fang, Y. and other authors. Hierarchical graph network for multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) . Association for Computational Lin-guistics, 2020. Fei, Z., Shen, X., Zhu, D., Zhou, F., Han, Z., Zhang, S., Chen, K., Shen, Z., and Ge, J. Lawbench: Benchmarking legal knowledge of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16289 , 2023. Feng, Z., Feng, X., Zhao, D., Yang, M., and Qin, B. Retrieval-generation synergy augmented large language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2310.05149 .Gao, L., Ma, X., Lin, J., and Callan, J. Precise zero-shot dense retrieval without relevance labels, 2022. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10496 .Gao, Y., Xiong, Y., Gao, X., Jia, K., Pan, J., Bi, Y., Dai, Y., Sun, J., and Wang, H. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 , 2023. Hayashi, H., Budania, P., Wang, P., Ackerson, C., Neer-vannan, R., and Neubig, G. WikiAsp: A Dataset for Multi-domain Aspect-based Summarization. Transac-tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 9: 211–225, 2021. Ho, X., Nguyen, A.-K. D., Sugawara, S., and Aizawa, A. Constructing a multi-hop qa dataset for compre-hensive evaluation of reasoning steps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01060 , 2020. Jiang, Z., Xu, F. F., Gao, L., Sun, Z., Liu, Q., Dwivedi-Yu, J., Yang, Y., Callan, J., and Neubig, G. Active retrieval augmented generation, 2023. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2305.06983 .Jiapeng, L., Runze, L., Yabo, L., Tong, Z., Mingling, L., and Xiang, C. Tree of reviews: A tree-based dynamic iterative retrieval framework for multi-hop question an-swering, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2404.14464 .Khattab, O., Santhanam, K., Li, X. L., Hall, D., Liang, P., Potts, C., and Zaharia, M. Demonstrate-search-predict: Composing retrieval and language models for knowledge-intensive nlp, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/ abs/2212.14024 .Kojima, T., Gu, S. S., Reid, M., Matsuo, Y., and Iwasawa, Y. Large language models are zero-shot reasoners. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 35: 22199–22213, 2022. Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., Kuttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih, W., Rocktaschel, T., et al. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 33:9459–9474, 2020. Li, R. and Du, X. Leveraging structured information for explainable multi-hop question answering and reason-ing, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2311. 03734 .Liang, L., Sun, M., Gui, Z., Zhu, Z., Jiang, Z., Zhong, L., Qu, Y., Zhao, P., Bo, Z., Yang, J., Xiong, H., Yuan, L., Xu, J., Wang, Z., Zhang, Z., Zhang, W., Chen, H., Chen, W., and Zhou, J. Kag: Boosting llms in professional do-mains via knowledge augmented generation, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.13731 .10 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

Ling, C., Zhao, X., Lu, J., Deng, C., Zheng, C., Wang, J., Chowdhury, T., Li, Y., Cui, H., Zhang, X., Zhao, T., Panalkar, A., Mehta, D., Pasquali, S., Cheng, W., Wang, H., Liu, Y., Chen, Z., Chen, H., White, C., Gu, Q., Pei, J., Yang, C., and Zhao, L. Domain specialization as the key to make large language models disruptive: A comprehensive survey, 2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2305.18703 .Ma, X., Gong, Y., He, P., Zhao, H., and Duan, N. Query rewriting for retrieval-augmented large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14283 , 2023. Panda, P., Agarwal, A., Devaguptapu, C., Kaul, M., and P, P. A. Holmes: Hyper-relational knowledge graphs for multi-hop question answering using llms, 2024. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06027 .Press, O., Zhang, M., Min, S., Schmidt, L., Smith, N. A., and Lewis, M. Measuring and narrowing the composi-tionality gap in language models, 2023. URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2210.03350 .Qiu, M. and other authors. Dynamically fusing recurrent neural networks for multi-hop question answering. In 

Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) . Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. Raina, V. and Gales, M. Question-based retrieval using atomic units for enterprise rag, 2024. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2405.12363 .Ram, O., Levine, Y., Dalmedigos, I., Muhlgay, D., Shashua, A., Leyton-Brown, K., and Shoham, Y. In-context retrieval-augmented language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 11:1316– 1331, 2023. Shao, Z., Gong, Y., Shen, Y., Huang, M., Duan, N., and Chen, W. Enhancing retrieval-augmented large language models with iterative retrieval-generation synergy, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15294 .Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux, M.-A., Lacroix, T., Rozi `ere, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E., Azhar, F., Rodriguez, A., Joulin, A., Grave, E., and Lam-ple, G. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023. Trivedi, H., Balasubramanian, N., Khot, T., and Sabharwal, A. Musique: Multihop questions via single-hop ques-tion composition. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:539–554, 2022. Trivedi, H., Balasubramanian, N., Khot, T., and Sabharwal, A. Interleaving retrieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions, 2023. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.10509 .Wang, C., Liu, X., Yue, Y., Tang, X., Zhang, T., Jiayang, C., Yao, Y., Gao, W., Hu, X., Qi, Z., Wang, Y., Yang, L., Wang, J., Xie, X., Zhang, Z., and Zhang, Y. Survey on factuality in large language models: Knowledge, retrieval and domain-specificity, 2023a. Wang, Y., Lipka, N., Rossi, R. A., Siu, A., Zhang, R., and Derr, T. Knowledge graph prompting for multi-document question answering, 2023b. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2308.11730 .Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., ichter, b., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V., and Zhou, D. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Koyejo, S., Mohamed, S., Agarwal, A., Belgrave, D., Cho, K., and Oh, A. (eds.), Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , volume 35, pp. 24824–24837. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. Xu, S., Pang, L., Shen, H., Cheng, X., and Chua, T.-S. Search-in-the-chain: Interactively enhancing large lan-guage models with search for knowledge-intensive tasks. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2024 , pp. 1362–1373, 2024. Yang, S. Advanced rag 01: Small-to-big re-trieval. https://towardsdatascience. com/advanced-rag-01-small-to-big -retrieval-172181b396d4 , 2023. Accessed: 2023-08-28. Yang, Z., Qi, P., Zhang, S., Bengio, Y., Cohen, W. W., Salakhutdinov, R., and Manning, C. D. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question an-swering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09600 , 2018. Zhang, J., Zhang, H., Zhang, D., Liu, Y., and Huang, S. End-to-end beam retrieval for multi-hop question an-swering, 2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2308.08973 .Zhang, K., Zeng, J., Meng, F., Wang, Y., Sun, S., Bai, L., Shen, H., and Zhou, J. Tree-of-reasoning question decomposition for complex question answering with large language models. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 38(17):19560–19568, 2024b. Zheng, H. S., Mishra, S., Chen, X., Cheng, H.-T., Chi, E. H., Le, Q. V., and Zhou, D. Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06117 , 2023. Zheng, H. S., Mishra, S., Chen, X., Cheng, H.-T., Chi, E. H., Le, Q. V., and Zhou, D. Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06117 .11 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

Zhong, Z., Liu, H., Cui, X., Zhang, X., and Qin, Z. Mix-of-granularity: Optimize the chunking granularity for retrieval-augmented generation, 2024. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2406.00456 .12 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

# A. Appendix 

Appendix A.1 provides detailed introduction to the three open-domain benchmarks, Appendix A.3 enumerates the hyperpa-rameters utilzied in our experiments, and Appendix A.4 presents the comprehensive experimental results. For a more thorough understanding of our methodology, a cost analysis is available in Appendix A.5. Additionally, an introduction and discussion of an alternative atomic tag presentation is also shown in this subsection. Appendix A.6 explores three real case studies. The prompts employed across the four components in our approach are outlined in Appendix A.7, accompanied by a discussion on the influence of decomposition demonstration. Finally, the evaluation conducted on two legal benchmarks are detailed in Appendix A.8. 

A.1. Introduction to Open-Domain Benchmarks 

We provide a brief overview of the multihop QA datasets used in our experiments, noting that our method does not leverage the question type information nor the number of hops information during the solving process, as our approach is designed to be agnostic to such classifications. Table 4 outlines the distribution of question types within our sampled sets, offering insight into the variety of reasoning challenges presented in our evaluation, though this does not directly impact our method. 

HotpotQA The HotpotQA dataset is a well-known multihop QA benchmark primarily consisting of 2-hop questions, each associated with 10 Wikipedia paragraphs. Among these, some paragraphs contain supporting facts essential to answering the question, while the rest serve as distractors. The dataset also includes a question type field, which delineates the logical reasoning required— comparison questions involve contrasting two entities, and bridge questions require inferring the bridge entity, or inferring the property of an entity through an intermediary entity, or locating the answer entity (Yang et al., 2018). Although our method operates independently of these types, their description here is to exemplify the nature of questions within the dataset and to contextualize the expected performance variance across different benchmarks. 

2WikiMultiHopQA Inspired by HotpotQA, 2WikiMultiHopQA expands the diversity of question types. It retains the 

comparison type from HotpotQA and introduces inference and compositional questions that evolve from the bridge type by focusing on entity attribute deduction and entity location, respectively. Additionally, the bridge comparison type is a novel category that requires a synthesis of bridge and comparison reasoning. This dataset typically presents 2-hop to 4-hop questions, each accompanied by 10 Wikipedia paragraphs containing supporting facts and distractors. While these types inform the dataset’s structure, they are not utilized by our method, which treats all questions uniformly regardless of their categorization. For the sake of brevity, 2WikiMultiHopQA is abbreviated to 2Wiki in this paper. 

MuSiQue Addressing the issue that many multihop questions can be solved via shortcuts—arriving at correct answers without proper reasoning—MuSiQue implements stringent filters and additional mechanisms specifically designed to encourage connected reasoning, as reported by Trivedi et al. (Trivedi et al., 2022). Unlike the other datasets, MuSiQue does not categorize questions by type, but it does provide explicit information on the number of hops required for each question, ranging from 2 to 4 hops. Each question is associated with 20 context paragraphs, which introduce a mix of relevant and irrelevant information, further complicating the task of discerning the correct reasoning path. This explicit hop information, while not used by our method, underscores the complexity of the dataset and the robustness required by models to handle such challenges effectively.                          

> Table 4. Distribution of question types across three distinct multihop QA datasets. Type Count Ratio comparison 107 21.4% bridge 393 78.6% (a) HotPotQA Type Count Ratio comparison 132 26.4% inference 64 12.8% compositional 196 39.2% bridge comparison 108 21.6% (b) 2WikiMultiHopQA #Hops Count Ratio 2263 52.6% 3169 33.8% 468 13.6% (c) MuSiQue

13 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

A.2. Introduction to Evaluation Methods 

In addition to the methods outlined in Table 1, we also conduct experiments with an iteratively search and decomposition method named SearChain (Xu et al., 2024) and a Knowledge Graph-based method named GraphRAG (Edge et al., 2024). The GraphRAG was inferred in both local and global modes. The methods evaluated in this study are listed as follows: • Zero-Shot CoT : Questions are addressed using solely the Chain-Of-Thought (CoT) technique, which prompts the LLMs to articulate its reasoning process step-by-step without the aid of example demonstrations or supplemental context. This method assesses the LLMs’ intrinsic knowledge and reasoning capabilities in a zero-shot setting. • Naive RAG : This approach employs dense retrieval from a flat knowledge base to procure relevant information for each question. The knowledge base consists of pre-embedded chunks are matched to the original question based on semantic similarity. The retrieval process is direct, without any intermediate task decomposition. • Self-Ask w/ Retrieval : This method employs a task decomposition strategy wherein the LLMs is prompted to iteratively generate and answer follow-up questions, thereby breaking down complex problems into more manageable sub-tasks. General demonstrations illustrating the logic and methodology of task decomposition are provided for all benchmarks to guide the LLMs’ reasoning process. Different to the original setting (Press et al., 2023), where the framework relies solely on LLM’s own knowledge to answer each follow-up question, in this setting, we introduces an additional retrieval component. Relevant chunks are retrieved with the follow-up question as the query from a flat knowledge base to provide a reference context. What’s more, we also limit the decomposition process to raise up to N follow-up questions to align with other methods. • IRCoT : This approach iteratively prompts LLMs to generate one more sentence of rationale with retrieved passages, and retrieves new passages with the newly generated reason. The original setting limit the process with a maximum token number (Trivedi et al., 2023). In our experiments, we limit the total number of iterations to the constant N we used for our methods. • Iter-RetGen : This method iteratively answers questions with retrieved passages, and uses the newly generated rationale and answer for the next-round retrieval. In this setting, we also limit the total number of iterations to the same N .• SearChain : This approach focuses on the interaction between LLM and Information Retrieval (IR). SearChain starts from a LLM-generated reasoning chain named Chain-of-Query (CoQ) where each node consists of an IR-oriented query-answer pair. It then iteratively verifies the answer of each node of CoQ by IR and re-generate the CoQ for node that is not consistent with the retrieved information. The re-generation mechanism let SearChain forms a novel reasoning path based on a tree, which enables LLM to dynamically modify the direction of reasoning. Since the official code loads pre-trained models from local without uploading those models online, we find models with most-similar name from HuggingFace to adapt it. Besides, the experimental results shown in Table 6 are conducted with BAAI/bge-m3 instead of the ColBERT retriever due to environmental issues. • ProbTree : This approach is an explict tree search method. ProbTree starts from a LLM-translated query tree for the given question, in which each non-root node denotes a sub-question of its parent node. Then, probabilistic reasoning is conducted over the tree, by solving questions from leaf to root considering the confidence of both question decomposing and answering. • GraphRAG Local : The knowledge base is pre-processed to construct a knowledge graph in accordance with the public guidance. The evaluation is inferred in local mode. • GraphRAG Global : The knowledge base is pre-processed to construct a knowledge graph in accordance with the public guidance. The evaluation is inferred in global mode. • KAR 3 (Ours) : The proposed knowledge-aware decomposition method iteratively decomposes complex questions into sub-questions and retrieves relevant knowledge up to a maximum of N iterations. This process limits the context for the final answer to the five most useful knowledge chunks. To better illustrate the distinctions among the evaluation methods discussed, we have systematically detailed their character-istics in Table 5. This table classifies each method according to its approach to question decomposition, chunk retrieval, and 14 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

Table 5. Method Comparison.                                                                     

> Method Decomposition Retrieval Generation Context demonstration path context sub-answer final answer Zero-Shot CoT N/A N/A N/A N/A Naive RAG N/A question →chunk N/A chunks Self-Ask w/ R. few-shot chain qa pairs sub-question →chunk chunks qa pairs IRCoT few-shot (implicit) rationale, chunks rationale sentence →chunk N/A rationale, chunks Iter-RetGen zero-shot (implicit) chunks whole rationale →chunk N/A chunks SearChain few-shot chain ∅; qa pairs, chunks sub-question →chunk ∅; chunks qa pairs ProbTree few-shot tree ∅sub-question →chunk chunks qa pairs KAR 3(Ours) zero-shot dynamic selected chunks sub-question →atomic question →chunk N/A selected chunks

the context used in answer generation. Specifically, it delineates whether each method operates under zero-shot or few-shot conditions, the nature of its decomposition process (e.g., explicit or implicit decomposition; chain-shaped, tree-shaped, or dynamically generated paths), and the context utilized during decomposition. The retrieval column clarifies the mechanisms each method employs to gather information, while the columns dedicated to the generation context—both for sub-answer and final answer generation—highlight the specific contexts each method leverages when generating answers. As Table 5 demonstrates, the decomposition module in KAR 3 employs a zero-shot, knowledge-aware approach, maintaining accumulated selected chunks in context for iterative decomposition. Additionally, we discuss the potential benefits of incorporating demonstration in Appendix A.7, suggesting that this feature could further enhance performance. This possibility is earmarked for future exploration. Notably, our approach dynamically formulates a decomposition path during iterations, allowing for adjustments based on new insights from the contextually provided knowledge. In the retrieval phase, it uses atomic tags to bridge the semantic gap between the query and the information within the chunks. Importantly, during the generation phase, our method retains the selected chunks, ensuring that the generation remains knowledge-aware and mitigates the risk of error accumulation often seen in methods that rely solely on follow-up questions and answers for context. 

A.3. Hyper-Parameters 

During the knowledge extraction phase, we utilize a temperature setting of 0.7 specifically for the Knowledge Atomizing 

process, promoting a balance between diversity and determinism in the generated atomic knowledge. Conversely, for all question-answering (QA) steps in each method, we implement a temperature of 0, ensuring consistent responses from the model. Regarding the retrieval component, we engage the text-embedding-ada-002 (version 2) as our embedding model for both the general knowledge bases and the atomic knowledge bases. For the general knowledge bases used in Naive RAG and Iter-RetGen, the retriever is configured to fetch up to 16 knowledge chunks, applying a retrieval score threshold of 0.2. For the general knowledge bases used in Self-Ask w/ Retrieval and IRCoT, where the retrieval chunks are used for a single follow-up question answering or the generation of single continuous rationale sentence, the reference chunks for whole rationale or final question answering are accumulated. The system retrieves 4 relevant chunks per request, maintaining the same score threshold of 0.2. In the case of atomic knowledge bases, the retriever is set to retrieve 4 relevant atomic tags for each atomic query but with a higher threshold 0.5 due to the shorter content length. 

A.4. Detailed Experimental Results Evaluation Metrics As for the evaluation metrics, three more metrics are employed in Appendix. Exact Match (EM) ,which assesses whether the response is identical to a predefined correct answer is applied as the community usually did. Furthermore, we encounter situations where a method achieves high accuracy (Acc) scores yet registers low F1 scores. To elucidate the underlying factors of such discrepancies, we also report on the Recall and Precision of the generated responses. Recall measures the proportion of relevant tokens from the answer labels that are captured in the response, while precision evaluates the relevance of the tokens in the generated answer with respect to the correct labels. 15 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

Table 6. Detailed performance comparison on multihop QA datasets. Best in bold, second-best underlined. 

Table 6. (a) HotPotQA                                                        

> Method EM F1 Acc Precision Recall Zero-Shot CoT 32.60 43.94 53.60 46.56 43.97 Naive RAG 56.80 72.67 82.60 74.52 74.86 Self-Ask w/ Retrieval 57.00 71.40 80.00 73.25 73.95 IRCoT 51.40 67.30 81.00 69.32 72.15 Iter-RetGen 59.60 75.27 86.60 77.18 77.62 SearChain 28.60 40.48 74.40 40.77 66.63 ProbTree 47.00 62.41 73.40 64.83 64.95 GraphRAG Local 0.00 10.66 89.00 5.90 83.07
> GraphRAG Global 0.00 7.42 64.80 4.08 63.16 KAR 3 (Ours )61.40 76.48 88.00 78.53 78.96

Table 6. (b) 2WikiMultiHopQA                                                        

> Method EM F1 Acc Precision Recall Zero-Shot CoT 35.67 41.40 43.87 41.43 43.11 Naive RAG 51.20 59.74 62.80 59.06 62.30 Self-Ask w/ Retrieval 60.60 69.06 75.00 67.88 73.15 IRCoT 55.00 63.83 70.40 62.47 68.86 Iter-RetGen 57.80 67.21 73.60 66.10 71.09 SearChain 7.00 15.67 68.40 11.91 66.74 ProbTree 57.00 69.42 80.00 67.61 76.89 GraphRAG Local 0.00 11.83 71.20 6.74 75.17 GraphRAG Global 0.00 7.35 45.00 4.09 55.43 KAR 3 (Ours )65.80 75.00 82.20 73.63 79.08

Table 6. (c) MuSiQue                                                        

> Method EM F1 Acc Precision Recall Zero-Shot CoT 12.93 22.90 23.47 24.40 24.10 Naive RAG 32.00 43.31 44.40 44.42 47.29 Self-Ask w/ Retrieval 38.20 46.76 51.40 46.75 51.00 IRCoT 36.00 47.57 49.20 48.70 50.30 Iter-RetGen 40.20 52.48 55.60 53.51 56.45 SearChain 24.40 33.26 45.80 33.00 46.37 ProbTree 28.57 43.26 52.86 42.27 54.70 GraphRAG Local 0.60 9.62 49.80 5.73 55.82 GraphRAG Global 0.00 5.16 44.60 2.82 52.19 KAR 3 (Ours )47.40 57.86 62.60 58.52 61.37

Detailed Main Results The detailed experimental results on multihop datasets HotpotQA, 2Wiki and MuSiQue are presented in Table 6. Besides the metrics shown in Table 1, the EM , Precision and Recall are provided here. 

Discussion of Graph-Based Method Notably, knowledge graph-based method, GraphRAG Local, excels in HotpotQA—a dataset predominantly comprised of 2-hop questions. However, in the other two datasets, which contain questions involving more hops, GraphRAG Local is merely on par with IRCoT. This highlights the challenge that knowledge graph-based methods face in addressing complex multihop questions. Regarding GraphRAG, originally designed for the query-focused summarization (QFS) task as outlined by (Edge et al., 2024), we observe its suboptimal performance in both local and global modes compared to our method. GraphRAG exhibits a curious trend: it achieves higher accuracy and recall scores while performing lower on EM, F1, and Precision metrics. A closer analysis of GraphRAG’s outputs reveals a tendency to echo the query and include meta-information about the answer within its graph structure. Despite attempts to refine its QA prompt, this behavior persists. An illustrative example is presented in Table 7, which shows GraphRAG Local’s response to a question from HotpotQA. 16 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

Table 7. An Example of GraphRAG Local output on a HotpotQA question. The table showcases the tendency to repeat the question and include meta-information in its response. Question Which country is home to Alsa Mall and Spencer Plaza? Answer Labels India Answer of GraphRAG Alsa Mall and Spencer Plaza are both located in Chennai, India [Data: In-dia and Chennai Community (2391); Entities (4901, 4904); Relationships (9479, 1687, 5215, 5217)]. 

Detailed Evaluation Results of N Selection Table 8 lists the granular performance metrics according to those we shown in Figure 5 for the ablation study on the iteration upper bound N . Different to the Recall we reported in Table 6, which indicates the recall tokens of the answer labels, the Recall * here represents the recall of the supporting facts provided by these datasets. 

Table 8. Ablation study on hyper-parameter N . Recall * indicates the recall of supporting facts. 

N HotpotQA 2Wiki MuSiQue Recall * F1 Acc Recall * F1 Acc Recall * F1 Acc 1 42.96 59.46 70.20 40.41 41.08 43.00 31.20 32.55 32.80 2 82.04 74.27 84.80 78.83 70.22 77.20 56.43 48.46 50.00 3 90.16 76.90 87.20 87.71 72.84 79.40 64.82 53.50 57.20 4 92.46 76.49 87.80 92.86 74.68 81.80 69.87 55.73 59.40 5 92.83 76.48 88.00 94.06 75.00 82.20 73.08 57.86 62.60 6 93.35 77.67 89.00 94.76 75.12 81.80 74.88 57.03 61.20 7 93.68 77.32 88.80 94.91 75.44 82.40 76.07 56.66 61.40 8 93.78 76.88 88.40 95.06 75.16 82.00 76.72 57.65 62.40 9 93.78 76.99 88.60 95.11 74.89 81.80 76.90 57.17 61.40 10 93.78 77.52 89.00 95.16 75.09 82.00 77.20 57.69 62.40 

Evaluation Results with Less Advanced LLM As introduced in the limitation discussion section, we have carried out a series of experiments utilizing GPT-3.5. The outcomes of these experiments are delineated in Table 9. For these specific trials, we substituted GPT-4 (1106-Preview) with GPT-3.5 (1106-Preview) as the language model, while maintaining all other experimental settings identical to those employed in the experiments summarized in Table 1. 

Table 9. Performance comparison of implementations with GPT-3.5 . Best in bold, second-best underlined. Method HotpotQA 2Wiki MuSiQue F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc Self-Ask w/ Retrieval 49.52 61.40 53.83 60.00 31.05 35.20 IRCoT 56.39 68.40 40.31 46.00 33.93 34.40 Iter-RetGen 48.63 66.80 44.32 55.20 25.77 37.80 KAR 3 (Ours ) 46.37 68.80 41.95 58.20 26.80 39.60 

A.5. Cost Analysis and Discussion 

In this section, we conduct a comprehensive cost analysis to evaluate our model’s API consumption. We first evaluate and compare the inference cost to other baseline methods, later we further decompose the cost into components, and finally a cost summarization of the one-time data preprocessing step will be provided. 

Inference Cost Comparison As Table 10 demonstrated, from the perspective of token consumption per QA, our method utilizes fewer tokens than both ProbTree and IRCoT, and is comparable to Iter-RetGen. However, our approach significantly outperforms these baselines on both F1 and Accuracy by a considerable margin. This demonstrates the efficiency of our 17 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

approach in balancing cost and performance. It is important to highlight that our method focuses on exploring potential reasoning chains, necessitating a thoughtful analysis during question decomposition with context at each iteration. As a result, completion token usage constitutes approximately one-quarter of the total consumption, distinguishing our approach from other baselines.                                              

> Table 10. Token consumption (average/QA) and performance comparison on MuSiQue. Method Token Consumption (⇓)Performance (⇑)
> Prompt Completion Total F1 Acc Zero-Shot CoT 85 105 191 22.90 23.47 Naive RAG 1765 103 1869 43.31 44.40 Self-Ask w/ Retrieval 5894 619 6514 46.76 51.40 IRCoT 9703 86 9789 47.57 49.20 Iter-RetGen 8140 473 8614 52.48 55.60 ProbTree 25225 650 25875 43.26 52.86 KAR 3(Ours) 6525 2295 8820 57.86 62.60

Token Consumption of Different Components In the experimental results presented so far, the same LLM is used for the decomposer, selector, and generator components. The prompts designed for these components are detailed in Appendix A.7. It is worth noting that these components can be configured to use different language models, we leave it as future works. The detailed token consumption of difference components on MuSiQue are illustrated in Table 11. The decomposition-selection loop iterates up to 5 rounds, leading to the multiple calls for decomposer and selector for each QA. Consequently, the decomposer and selector constitute the majority of the total consumption.                  

> Table 11. Token consumption (average/QA) on MuSiQue. Component Prompt Completion Total Query Proposer 2691 768 3459 Atomic Selector 3278 1429 4707 Answer Generator 556 98 654 KAR 3(Ours) 6525 2295 8820

Token Consumption of Chunk Atomization The chunk atomization, as a one-time preprocessing step, for which the LLM API consumption scales linearly with the number of data chunks and constitutes an overhead that varies slightly across different benchmarks. As described in Section 4.1, all chunks are derived from the context paragraphs, and the number of LLM calls, which is equivalent to the chunk count, is listed in the last column of Table 12, together with the token consumption, for your reference. The input token size (i.e., Prompt in the table) is primarily determined by the chunk size, while the output token size (i.e., Completion in the table) depends on the size of generated atomic tags.                  

> Table 12. Token consumption (average/chunk) and chunk count statistics. Dataset Prompt Completion Total Calls HotpotQA 209 129 338 4950 2Wiki 199 122 321 3410 MuSiQue 197 123 320 7120

An Alternative Presentation of Atomic Tag We recognize the significance of scalability when applying our method to extensive datasets. To enhance cost-effectiveness while maintaining scalability, we integrate the use of open-source language models like Llama 3, which significantly reduces preprocessing costs. Additionally, we explore alternative atomic tag presentation to further optimize resource usage. One promising approach is atomizing data into plain-text sentences, treating each sentence as an atomic tag. This method simplifies the preprocessing steps by utilizing the *spacy* library to segment the original data chunks into sentences, thereby avoiding the need for language model invocations. Our evaluations, as detailed in Table 13, show that this approach, while reducing performance to 55.2% on the MuSiQue dataset, still outperforms most 18 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

baseline methods. This demonstrates its potential effectiveness in scenarios where lower-cost preprocessing is a priority, offering a viable alternative that balances cost and performance efficiently. 

Table 13. Performance of alternative atomic tags on MuSiQue. LLM Atomic Tags F1 Acc Llama 3 plain text sentence 45.88 54.20 atomic question (Ours) 50.68 59.70 

GPT-4 plain text 50.72 55.20 atomic question (Ours) 57.86 62.60 

A.6. Real Case Studies 

This section presents there real case studies from our evaluation benchmark to illustrate the underlying principles of our proposed decomposition pipeline, as detailed in Algorithm 1. Through these real-world examples, we aim to highlight the benefits of our systematic approach. These cases will shed light on how each step of the pipeline contributes to improved performance and the insights gained from their implementation. 

Figure 6. Case (a): Given the lesser-known film “What Women Love” as opposed to the more popular “What Women Want,” single-path methods like Self-Ask on the left are predisposed to generating follow-up questions about the latter, leading to an incorrect final answer. Conversely, KAR 3 can effectively discern the intended meaning of the original question by positing several atomic queries and postpone the task understanding to atomic selection phase with relevant atomic tags provided, and subsequently arriving at an accurate conclusion. 

19 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

KAR 3 outperforms single-path methods by effiectively discerning the intended meaning of the original questions. 

Our task decomposition strategy involves generating multiple atomic queries rather than producing a single deterministic follow-up question, as demonstrated in the Self-Ask approach. Contemporary decomposition methods typically employ a generative model to formulate a singular follow-up question. However, this approach carries an intrinsic risk of generating erroneous questions, potentially leading to an incorrect decomposition pathway and, ultimately, an erroneous answer. Consider the Case (a) depicted in Figure 6, where the original question pertains to a film titled “What Women Love.” Due to the existence of a more prominent film, “What Women Want,” the employed language model tends to ‘correct’ the original question. Consequently, methods like Self-Ask (as shown on the left side of Figure 6) generate only one follow-up question related to this erroneously assumed object. In the illustrated instance, although the target chunk has been retrieved due to the similarity in embeddings, a ‘false’ intermediate answer is produced for the ‘false’ follow-up question, culminating in an incorrect final response. In contrast, our methodology posits atomic queries concerning both “What Women Love” and “What Women Want,” thereby seeking to clarify the true intent of the initial question. With both films existing and relevant atomic tags being retrieved, our approach subsequently gains the advantage of verifying the question’s intent and selecting the correct and most pertinent chunk during the atomic selection phase.   

> Figure 7. Case (b): By proposing multiple atomic queries, KAR 3effectively retrieves the relevant knowledge chunk, whereas the single deterministic follow-up question approach employed by Self-Ask fails to align with the knowledge base’s schema, resulting in a retrieval failure.

KAR 3 outperforms baseline methods through better knowledge schema alignment by atomic tags as bridge. The discrepancy between the formulation of the corpus and the query, is another critical factor advocating for a multi-query approach over a singular deterministic one. The presentation gap can impede the retrieval process even when the generated follow-up question is semantically accurate. For instance, as illustrated in Case (b) in Figure 7, a single-path method such as Self-Ask on the left side might directly inquire ‘Who is the mother of Oskar Roehler?’ However, the knowledge base articulates familial relationships using a different schema, ‘A is the son of B and C’ in this case, thus the retrieval process falters despite the correctness of the question. Even when we applied the hierarchical retrieval to Self-Ask, the Self-Ask with Hierarchical Retrieval did not succeed in bridging this gap. In contrast, our approach, which generates multiple atomic queries, encompasses a broader range of phrasings that correspond to the diverse representations in the knowledge base. In the depicted case, while the atomic query specifically asking for Oskar Roehler’s mother encounters the same retrieval issue, an alternative query seeking information about his parents successfully retrieves the target chunk. This exemplifies how our method’s flexibility in query generation enhances the likelihood of aligning with the knowledge base’s structure and 20 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

obtaining accurate information. Our methodology emphasizes the retrieval of atomic tags rather than directly retrieving chunks. This design choice is exemplified in Case (b) depicted in Figure 7. The knowledge chunk in the corpus is structured using the pattern ‘A ... as the son of B and C’, which poses challenges for direct retrieval by queries such as ‘Who is the mother of ...’. In our specialized knowledge base, such direct queries tend to retrieve chunks conforming to the patterns ‘A is the mother of B’ or ‘A is the father of B’. By utilizing atomic tags as intermediaries for retrieval, our approach effectively narrows the gap between a single query and the multiple sentence structures found in the knowledge base. It facilitates bridging the expression pattern differences exemplified by ’the mother of’ versus ’the son of’ in this scenario. 

KAR 3 outperforms methods that rely on intermediate answers by maintaining concise and highly relevant context. 

In contrast to methods like Self-Ask, which only retains intermediate answers for subsequent processing, our method preserves the entire chunk as contextual information. During the atomic selection phase, we present a list of atomic tags as candidate summaries of the relevant content from the original chunk. This strategy significantly reduces token usage and simplifies the process of selecting the pertinent information. Case (c) in Figure 8 demonstrates the dual benefits of our approach: first, by selecting from a curated list of atomic tags, we streamline the identification of relevant information; second, by retaining the entire selected chunk rather than just the intermediate answer, we ensure a rich context is maintained for accurate and comprehensive subsequent processing. While the Self-Ask method on the left retrieves the target chunk, it fails to correctly identify the pertinent ‘Ernie Watts’ due to the excessive contextual information. Since retrieved chunks in Self-Ask are discarded after generating an intermediate answer, the method potentially follows an incorrect pathway, leading to an inaccurate conclusion. In contrast, our approach can efficiently filter and select the appropriate atomic tag from a concise list. Although the atomic tag in this round pertains to the role of Ernie Watts, there is no need to inquire further about his birthplace, as this information is encapsulated within the selected chunk, which remains available for context in subsequent rounds.   

> Figure 8. Case (c): KAR 3has the advantage of leveraging a concise list of atomic tags for targeted selection and retaining full chunks for rich contextual support. Conversely, Self-Ask’s approach, although successful in retrieving relevant chunks, is compromised by its dependency on intermediate answers for context, which ultimately results in the generation of incorrect final answers.

21 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

A.7. Prompt Design 

Our approach employs four distinct prompts: (1) Atomic question tagging prompt: the one used to pre-processing the source paragraphs that linking each paragraphs with several atomic questions as atomic tags; (2) Atomic query proposer prompt: the one used when generating multiple atomic query proposals, referring to line 1 in Algorithm 1; (3) Atomic tag selection prompt: the one used when selecting the most useful atomic tag from the given question list, referring to line 1 in Algorithm 1; (4) Question answering prompt: the one applied upon exiting the decomposition loop to generate the final answer to the given question, as described in line 1 of Algorithm 1. 

Atomic Question Tagging Prompt 

# Task Your task is to extract as many questions as possible that are relevant and can be answered by the given content. Please try to be diverse and avoid extracting duplicated or similar questions. Make sure your question contain necessary entity names and avoid to use pronouns like it, he, she, they, the company, the person etc. # Output Format Output your answers line by line, with each question on a new line, without itemized symbols or numbers. # Content 

{content }

# Output 

Atomic Query Proposer Prompt 

# Task Your task is to analyse the providing context then raise atomic sub-questions for the knowledge that can help you answer the question better. Think in different ways and raise as many diverse questions as possible. # Output Format Please output in following JSON format: 

{{ 

"thinking": <your thinking for this task, including analysis to the question and the given context>, "sub questions": <a list of sub-questions indicating what you need> 

}} 

# Context The context we already have: 

{chosen content }

# Question 

{content }

# Your Output 

22 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

Atomic Tag Selection Prompt                                                                                     

> #Task Your task is to analyse the providing context then decide which sub-questions may be useful to be answered before you can answer the given question. Select amost relevant sub-question from the given question list, avoid selecting sub-question that can already be answered with the given context or with your own knowledge. #Output Format Please output in following JSON format:
> {{
> "thinking": <your thinking for this selection task>, "question idx": <a sub-question index, an integer from 1to {num atom questions }>
> }}
> #Context The context we already have:
> {chosen content }
> #Sub-Questions You Can Choose From
> {atom question list str }
> #Question
> {content }
> #Your Output

Question Answering Prompt                                                                       

> #Task Your task is to answer aquestion referring to agiven context, if any. For answering the Question at the end, you need to first read the articles, reports, or context provided, then give your final answer. #Output format Your output should strictly follow the format below. Make sure your output parsable by json in Python.
> {{
> "answer": <Your Answer, format it as astring.>, "rationale": <rationale behind your choice>
> }}
> #Context, if any
> {context if any }
> #Question
> {content }{ yes or no limit }
> Let’s think step by step.

Demonstration Discussion In our current experiments, all prompts are zero-shot, meaning no demonstrations are provided to illustrate the expected reasoning logic. To explore whether demonstrations could enhance performance, we designed an ablation study. We adapted the Self-Ask w/ Retrieval and IRCoT methodologies previously employed, modifying the prompts and task descriptions to create zero-shot, demonstration-free variants of these methods. These were denoted as 

Zero-Shot Self-Ask w/ Retrieval and Zero-Shot IRCoT . The results of the experiment are presented in Table 14. The experimental results reveal that the Zero-Shot Self-Ask w/ Retrieval method experiences a marginal decline in accuracy for the 2Wiki and MuSiQue datasets, potentially due to the inherent randomness in generation. However, the inclusion of demonstrations significantly improves all F1 scores and enhances the overall performance of the IRCoT method. This suggests that demonstrations could be particularly beneficial for methods that rely on a step-by-step decomposition approach. Consequently, integrating demonstrations is identified as a promising direction for future work within the KAR 3 framework. 23 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

Table 14. Performance comparison: Zero-Shot vs. Few-Shot. Method HotpotQA 2Wiki MuSiQue F1 Acc F1 Acc F1 Acc Zero-Shot Self-Ask w/ Retrieval 55.76 76.20 54.98 76.20 40.97 50.40 Self-Ask w/ Retrieval 71.40 80.00 69.06 75.00 46.76 51.40 Zero-Shot IRCoT 58.22 75.80 49.69 60.20 37.17 43.00 IRCoT 67.30 81.00 63.83 70.40 47.57 49.20 

A.8. Evaluation on Legal Benchmarks 

In this subsection, we present the performance of our approach on two legal benchmarks: LawBench (Fei et al., 2023) and Open Australian Legal QA (Butler, 2023). Before doing so, we provide a brief description of each benchmark. 

LawBench LawBench is a comprehensive legal benchmark for Chinese laws. It comprises 20 meticulously designed tasks aimed at accurately assessing the legal capabilities of LLMs. Unlike some existing benchmarks that rely solely on multiple-choice questions, LawBench includes a variety of task types that are closely related to real-world applications. These tasks encompass legal entity recognition, reading comprehension, crime amount calculation, and legal consulting, among others. Since not all tasks are RAG-oriented (e.g., reading comprehension), we have selected 6 specific tasks, which are detailed in Table 15. The number of questions of each task is 500. 

Table 15. Overview of LawBench tasks Task No. Task Type Metric 1-1 Statute Recitation Generation F1 1-2 Legal Knowledge Q&A Single Choice EM 3-1 Statute Prediction (Fact-based) Multiple Choices EM 3-2 Statute Prediction (Scenario-based) Generation F1 3-6 Case Analysis Single Choice EM 3-8 Consultation Generation F1 

We also provide example questions of these tasks for the readers reference (translated using GPT-4). 

1-1: Answer the following question by directly providing the content of the article:What 

,→ is the content of Article 76 of the Securities Law? 1-2: According to the ’Securities Law’, which of the following statements about stock 

,→ exchanges is incorrect? A: Without the permission of the stock exchange, no entity 

,→ or individual may publish real-time securities trading information; B: The stock 

,→ exchange may restrict trading on securities accounts that exhibit major abnormal 

,→ trading conditions as needed, and report to the securities regulatory authority 

,→ under the State Council for record; C: The accumulated property of a member-based 

,→ stock exchange belongs to the members, and their rights are jointly enjoyed by the 

,→ members; during its existence, the accumulated property may not be distributed to 

,→ the members; D: The stock exchange formulates listing rules, trading rules, member 

,→ management rules, and other relevant rules in accordance with securities laws and 

,→ administrative regulations, and reports to the securities regulatory authority under 

,→ the State Council for record. 3-1: Based on the following facts and charges, provide the relevant articles of the 

,→ Criminal Law. Facts: The Yushu City, Jilin Province, accused that on November 15, 

,→ 2015, the defendant He signed a car rental agreement with Guo, the owner of a taxi 

,→ with license plate number xxx. The agreement stipulated a monthly rent of RMB 

,→ 3,900.00, payable monthly. On January 19, 2016, without the knowledge of Guo, the 

,→ defendant He concealed the truth and falsely claimed to be the owner of the taxi. 

,→ He signed a car rental agreement with the victim Ma, with a monthly rent of RMB 

,→ 3,800.00 and a rental period of one year, collecting a total of RMB 50,600.00 from 

,→ Ma for one year’s rent and vehicle deposit. On February 26, 2016, the taxi was 

,→ retrieved by its owner Guo from the victim Ma. The victim Ma repeatedly asked the 

,→ defendant He to return the rent and deposit, but the defendant He refused to return 

,→ them. The prosecution provided evidence including the defendant’s confession, the 

,→ victim’s statement, witness testimonies, and documentary evidence, and believed 

24 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

Table 16. Evaluation Results on Legal Benchmarks (Metric is F1 / EM as indicated in Table 15) Task Zero-Shot CoT GraphRAG Local Ours (N=5) LawBench 1-1 21.31 23.27 78.58 

1-2 54.24 62.60 70.60 

3-1 53.32 74.60 83.16 

3-2 27.51 25.98 46.05 

3-6 51.16 47.64 61.91 

3-8 17.44 18.43 23.58 

Open Australian Legal QA 25.10 34.35 63.34 

Table 17. Evaluation Results on Legal Benchmarks (Metric is Acc )Task Zero-Shot CoT GraphRAG Local Ours (N=5) LawBench 1-1 1.23 16.60 90.12 

1-2 54.00 63.40 70.60 

3-1 49.90 75.40 88.82 

3-2 15.83 27.60 67.54 

3-6 51.12 57.00 62.73 

3-8 49.70 58.80 61.72 

Open Australian Legal QA 16.48 88.27 98.59 

,→ that the defendant He, with the purpose of illegal possession, defrauded others of 

,→ their property by fabricating facts and concealing the truth during the signing and 

,→ performance of the contract. The amount was relatively large, and his actions 

,→ violated the provisions of Article xx of the Criminal Law of the People’s Republic 

,→ of China, and he should be held criminally responsible for xx. Charge: Contract 

,→ Fraud. 3-2: Please provide the legal basis according to the specific scenario and question, only 

,→ the content of the specific legal provision is needed, each scenario involves only 

,→ one legal provision. Scenario: A cargo ship arrives at the port of discharge, but 

,→ the consignee fails to arrive in time to collect the goods. Under which legal 

,→ provision can the captain unload the goods at another appropriate place? 3-6: One year after the bar opened, the business environment changed drastically, and all 

,→ partners held a meeting to discuss countermeasures. According to the ’Partnership 

,→ Enterprise Law,’ the following voting matters are considered valid votes: A: Zhang 

,→ believes that the name ’Tongcheng’ is not attractive and proposes to change it to ’ 

,→ Tongsheng Bar.’ Wang and Zhao agree, but Li opposes; B: In view of the sluggish 

,→ business, Wang proposes to suspend operations for one month for renovation and 

,→ reorganization. Zhang and Zhao agree, but Li opposes; C: Due to the urgent needs of 

,→ the bar, Zhao proposes to sell a batch of coffee machines to the bar. Zhang and 

,→ Wang agree, but Li opposes; D: Given the four partners’ lack of experience in bar 

,→ management, Li proposes to appoint his friend Wang as the managing partner. Zhang 

,→ and Wang agree, but Zhao opposes. 3-8: Resident A rented out the house to B. With A’s consent, B renovated the rented house 

,→ and sublet it to C. C unilaterally altered the load-bearing structure of the house. 

,→ Why can A request B to bear liability for breach of contract? 

Open Australian Legal QA The benchmark consists of 2,124 questions and answers synthesized by GPT-4 from the Australian legal corpus. All questions are of the generation type. One example is: “What is the landlord’s general obligation under section 63 of the Act in the case of Anderson v Armitage [2014] NSWCATCD 157 in New South Wales?” Evaluation results are listed in Table 16, where we only compare to “GraphRAG Local”, as it generally performs better than “GraphRAG Global” on these tasks. For the aforementioned reasons, we also use GPT-4 to evaluate all experimental results, reporting the accuracy ( Acc ) in Table 17. When comparing the results in Table 16 and Table 17, we observe that the order of the results is preserved, even though some metrics change significantly. In the following section, we aim to identify the reasons behind these changes, 25 From Complex to Atomic: Enhancing Augmented Generation 

which may provide valuable insights for designing better metrics to evaluate RAG frameworks in the future. 1. The accuracy of our approach increases significantly for generation tasks (1-1, 3-2, Open Australian Legal QA). For these tasks, our answers are often semantically equivalent but syntactically different from the golden answers. This explains the improved metric performance, as GPT-4 can compare the semantic content of the answers. This also applies to the “GraphRAG Local” results for the “Open Australian Legal QA” task. 2. The accuracy of “GraphRAG Local” decreases for generation tasks 1-1 and 3-2. These tasks involve statute recitation and prediction, requiring the retrieval of specific articles. Upon detailed examination, We find that “GraphRAG Local” often fails to retrieve the correct articles or references the wrong ones, but it tends to repeat the legal information. Therefore, token-level recall can be improved by simply rephrasing legal names and common prefixes, such as “According to XX law, XX articles...”. 3. Both our approach and “GraphRAG Local” show significant accuracy improvements on task 3-8. Besides the reason mentioned in the first point, the quality of the golden answers may also contribute to this difference. The questions and golden answers in task 3-8 are sourced from a consulting website, resulting in varying quality. For example, one question asks “Do the children from the original marriage have an obligation to support the father?” However, the provided golden answer includes an irrelevant article, “Article 1067,” which pertains to parents’ obligations to support minor children. 

Question: In the case where both parents are divorced and have formed their own 

,→ families with new children, and according to the court’s judgment, the father is 

,→ required to pay monthly child support to the mother until the child is 18 years 

,→ old. Do the children from the original marriage have an obligation to support 

,→ the father? Reference Answer: In our country, biological children have an obligation to support 

,→ their parents who are divorced. The relationship between children and parents 

,→ does not dissolve because of the divorce of the children or parents. Supporting 

,→ parents is a legal obligation of the children. If the children do not support 

,→ the elderly, the parents can directly file a lawsuit in the People’s Court 

,→ requesting the court to order the daughter to pay support. Legal basis: Article 

,→ 1067 of the Civil Code of the People’s Republic of China states that if parents 

,→ do not fulfill their obligation to support, minor children or adult children who 

,→ cannot live independently have the right to request support from their parents. 

,→ If adult children do not fulfill their obligation to support, parents who are 

,→ incapacitated or have difficulties in living have the right to request support 

,→ from adult children. Article 1084 states that the relationship between parents 

,→ and children does not dissolve because of the parents’ divorce. After the 

,→ divorce, whether the children are directly raised by the father or the mother, 

,→ they are still the children of both parents. Lawyer’s explanation: After the 

,→ parents are divorced, adult children still have the obligation to support both 

,→ parents. The obligation of adult children to support their parents does not 

,→ change because of changes in the parents’ relationship. If adult children do not 

,→ fulfill their obligation to support, parents who are incapacitated or have 

,→ difficulties in living have the right to request support from adult children. Our Answer: Yes, there is an obligation to support. Legal basis: According to Article 

,→ 1069 of the Civil Code of the People’s Republic of China, it is stipulated that: 

,→ ’The obligation of children to support their parents does not terminate because 

,→ of changes in the parents’ marital relationship.’ Therefore, even if the 

,→ parents are divorced and remarried with new children, the original children 

,→ still have an obligation to support their parents. 

4. The accuracy of all methods on choice tasks 1-2, 3-1, and 3-6 almost coincides with the F1 score, as expected. An exception is task 3-1, where the difference is mainly due to GPT-4’s capacity to understand Chinese, particularly in distinguishing numbers in Arabic and Chinese. In Chinese law, all numbers are written in Chinese, while in the golden answers, all numbers are given in Arabic. 26