Title: CQC-RAG: Robust Retrieval-Augmented Generation via Cross-Query Consistency

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.13438v1

Published Time: Fri, 12 Jun 2026 01:05:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# CQC-RAG: Robust Retrieval-Augmented Generation via Cross-Query Consistency 

# Yanjia Sun 

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China Chengdu, Sichuan, China sunyanjia@std.uestc.edu.cn 

# Sifan Liu 

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China Chengdu, Sichuan, China liusifan@std.uestc.edu.cn 

# Jie Shao ∗

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China Chengdu, Sichuan, China shaojie@uestc.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has become a common approach for improving the factuality of Large Language Models (LLMs), yet its reliability remains highly sensitive to how external evidence is retrieved and used. Semantically equivalent queries with different syntactic forms may lead to different retrieval results, while irrelevant or misleading documents can further induce hallu-cinated answers. Existing multi-path reasoning methods improve robustness by sampling multiple candidate answers and applying voting- or confidence-based selection, but they still face two limita-tions: diversity is often injected through uncontrollable decoding randomness, and answer evaluation is usually confined to a sin-gle query-induced evidence view. To address these limitations, we propose a Cross-Query Consistency Hypothesis: correct answers tend to maintain high confidence across semantically equivalent but syntactically diverse queries, whereas noise-induced halluci-nations exhibit unstable confidence under such query variations. Based on this hypothesis, we introduce CQC-RAG, a framework that co-designs query-level diversity injection with cross-query consistency evaluation. CQC-RAG rewrites the original question into diverse but meaning-preserving queries, reranks a shared doc-ument pool to construct query-conditioned reasoning contexts, applies an evidence-grounded protocol to extract answer-evidence pairs and selects answers according to their confidence stability across these contexts. This design enables self-evaluation with-out external supervision and does not rely on expanded retrieval coverage. Experiments on four open-domain question answering benchmarks show that CQC-RAG outperforms the strongest previ-ous multi-query baseline by +4.76 pp EM on TriviaQA and +9.12 pp EM on MuSiQue, validating the effectiveness of cross-query consis-tency for filtering noise-induced hallucinations. Code is available at https://github.com/FrancesPlus/CQC-RAG. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Computing methodologies → Knowledge representation and reasoning . 

> ∗Corresponding author: Jie Shao. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
> Conference’17, Washington, DC, USA
> ©2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/2018/06 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

## Keywords 

Retrieval-augmented generation, Large language model, Cross-query consistency 

ACM Reference Format: 

Yanjia Sun, Sifan Liu, and Jie Shao. 2026. CQC-RAG: Robust Retrieval-Augmented Generation via Cross-Query Consistency. In . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

## 1 Introduction 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has become a widely adopted paradigm for mitigating hallucinations and knowledge obsoles-cence in Large Language Models (LLMs) by retrieving external knowledge and incorporating it into the generation context [ 5, 11 ]. Despite its effectiveness, RAG remains fragile in practice. On the one hand, the specific formulation of a query significantly affects retrieval quality: semantically equivalent queries that differ only in syntactic structure, such as active versus passive voice or synonym substitution, lead to an average of 15%–20% degradation in retrieval performance across different datasets, with extreme cases exceed-ing 40% [ 2]. On the other hand, retrieved documents may contain information irrelevant to the question, and studies have shown that such irrelevant inputs substantially interfere with the reasoning process of models, causing errors and hallucinations [ 10 ]. These observations suggest that answer reliability in RAG depends not only on the language model, but also on how the question induces and prioritizes external evidence. A common strategy for improving robustness is to generate mul-tiple reasoning paths and then select a final answer from them. Self-Consistency [ 20 ] samples multiple reasoning paths from the same query and selects the most consistent answer through ma-jority voting, establishing the theoretical foundation that correct answers tend to converge across diverse reasoning paths while in-correct answers are scattered stochastically. SPARC-RAG [ 25 ] uses adaptive sequential-parallel reasoning, while Speculative RAG [ 21 ]adopts a draft-then-verify mechanism to produce and evaluate can-didate answers. These methods improve robustness by exploiting answer agreement across multiple generations. Yet, when applied to open-domain RAG settings without external supervision, existing methods still face two fundamental limitations: 

• Challenge 1: Uncontrollability of the diversity injec-tion mechanism. Existing approaches rely primarily on token-level temperature sampling, which often struggles with a trade-off between semantic drift (at high tempera-tures) and path redundancy (at low temperatures). More importantly, because all generated paths share the same ini-tial query formulation, this decoding-level randomness fails  

> arXiv:2606.13438v1 [cs.IR] 11 Jun 2026 Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Sun et al.

to address the inherent sensitivity of retrieval systems to query formulations [2]. 

• Challenge 2: Limited discriminability of answer evalua-tion. Conventional majority voting treats all reasoning paths equally, and even recent confidence-weighted selections re-main restricted to repeat inference over a single retrieval perspective, leaving them vulnerable to errors consistently reinforced by biased or noisy evidence [9, 15]. These two challenges are tightly coupled. The quality of diversity injection directly determines the distributional characteristics of candidate answers, which in turn affects the difficulty and accu-racy of evaluation. Conversely, the effectiveness of the evaluation mechanism determines whether the value of diversity injection can be fully exploited. Therefore, diversity injection and answer evaluation must be co-designed as an integrated whole. To this end, we propose CQC-RAG, a Cross-Query Consistency RAG framework that co-designs diversity injection and answer evaluation as an integrated system. CQC-RAG is built on the Cross-Query Consistency Hypothesis , which posits that correct an-swers exhibit stable high confidence across semantically equivalent but syntactically diverse queries due to their grounding in gen-uinely relevant documents. In contrast, noise-induced hallucinated answers rely on spurious, context-dependent correlations, causing significant confidence fluctuations across these query variations. To operationalize this hypothesis, CQC-RAG first generates a set of semantically equivalent but syntactically diverse queries through query rewriting, introducing controlled diversity at the query level rather than at the decoding level. All rewritten queries share the same retrieved document pool, but a reranker reorders the doc-uments according to the semantic relevance to each individual query, producing differentiated priority orderings across queries that constitute distinct reasoning contexts. The model performs parallel reasoning over these contexts, generating diverse candi-date answers. Finally, we compute the confidence of each answer under each query perspective based on model logits and select the answer that maintain high confidence across queries, characterized by high mean and low variance, achieving answer self-evaluation without external supervision signals. It is important to emphasize that all queries share the same document pool, and the performance gains come from the cross-query consistency framework rather than from expanded retrieval coverage. Through this pipeline, diversity injection and answer evaluation are seamlessly coupled, as query-level variations do not act as random decoding noise but rather systematically construct the structured, multi-perspective contexts required for our consistency-based evaluation. We validate the effectiveness of CQC-RAG on open-domain Ques-tion Answering (QA) datasets including TriviaQA and MuSiQue. Experimental results demonstrate that CQC-RAG significantly out-performs baseline methods such as Self-Consistency and Specula-tive RAG, indicating that cross-query consistency evaluation can effectively identify and filter hallucinated answers induced by noise, thereby validating the Cross-Query Consistency Hypothesis. Our technical contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We propose the Cross-Query Consistency Hypothesis, which establishes a theoretical connection between the stability of answer confidence across diverse query formulations and answer correctness. 

• We design CQC-RAG, a framework that co-designs query-level diversity injection with cross-query consistency evalua-tion. By reranking a shared document pool with semantically equivalent but syntactically diverse queries to produce dif-ferentiated reasoning contexts, CQC-RAG enables answer verification across multiple knowledge perspectives without increasing the retrieval budget. 

• Extensive experiments on single-hop and multi-hop question-answering benchmarks demonstrate the superior effective-ness and efficiency of our method. 

## 2 Related Work 

Our proposed CQC-RAG framework lies at the intersection of im-proving generation robustness and evaluating answer reliability. Specifically, our work is most closely related to two lines of re-search: (1) injecting query-level diversity to enhance the robustness of RAG systems against contextual noise; (2) leveraging multi-path reasoning and self-consistency to mitigate model hallucinations and designing unsupervised evaluation mechanisms for response verification. We review these closely related works in detail below. 

## 2.1 Query-Level Diversity for Robust RAG 

Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) enhances LLMs by incorpo-rating external documents into inference [ 5 , 11 ], but this also makes generation sensitive to how evidence is retrieved and organized. Irrelevant passages can induce over-reasoning and hallucinations [ 22 ], while semantically equivalent query reformulations can sub-stantially change retrieval recall and downstream answers [ 2 ]. This suggests that robust RAG requires not only better evidence, but also a more controlled way to expose evidence under query variation. Existing query optimization methods address this issue mainly from a retrieval perspective. Query rewriting methods such as Rewrite-Retrieve-Read [ 13 ] and Adaptive-RAG [ 6] employ LLMs to reformulate queries into more canonical forms, aiming to predict a single optimal entry point for retrieval. SiReRAG [ 26 ] constructs en-hanced indexing mechanisms that capture both semantically similar and explicitly related information for multi-hop reasoning. RARE [17 ] and DMQR-RAG [ 12 ] use iterative or multi-query rewriting to improve coverage and precision. These methods show the utility of query reformulation, but they generally use diversity to enlarge, refine, or merge retrieved evidence. Therefore, these improved methods do not directly resolve the first challenge: how to inject controllable diversity for reasoning rather than merely for retrieval. Once rewritten queries are merged or optimized toward a single best query, their query-specific evi-dence priorities are largely discarded; meanwhile, token-level sam-pling still inherits the same query-induced retrieval bias. Our work instead treats query diversity as a controlled way to construct complementary reasoning contexts over a shared document pool, leaving the detailed design to the method section. 

## 2.2 Discriminative Answer Evaluation 

The second challenge concerns how to select a reliable answer once multiple candidate reasoning paths are available. Self-Consistency CQC-RAG: Robust Retrieval-Augmented Generation via Cross-Query Consistency Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA q1

q2

q3

α1

α2

α3

E1

E2

E3

1 3 5

1 5 4

3 1 4( )



S

αi Ei ො𝛼 

(a) Framework of cross -query consistency RAG 

> Evaluate the cross -query
> consistency score of each
> candidate answer and select
> the best as final answer org

## q  

> Rerank D based on paraphrased
> queries without external retrieval
> Parallel
> rewriting

D

αi Ei

q1 q2 q31( )

 

> S2()

 

> S3()

      

> S()()Var ()

        

> =−qQqQSPPE

ො𝛼 (Valid | , , )



P q E

(b) Cross -query consistency 

confidence estimation 

: Original query  qi : Candidate answer  ො𝛼 : Final answer org q D : Retrieved  documents αi: Paraphrased query 

Figure 1: Illustration of CQC-RAG. CQC-RAG employs a parallel rewriting mechanism to construct multiple queries that are semantically equivalent yet syntactically diverse. This enables multi-perspective reasoning over the context, yielding several candidate answers. The optimal answer is subsequently selected based on cross-query consistency confidence estimation. 

[ 20 ] samples multiple reasoning paths from the same query and chooses the most frequent answer, establishing the principle that correct answers tend to converge while incorrect ones are more scattered. This paradigm has inspired RAG-oriented extensions. SPARC-RAG [ 25 ] adaptively allocates sequential and parallel rea-soning with specialized agents, while Speculative RAG [ 21 ] follows a draft-then-verify pipeline in which candidate answers are gener-ated from document subsets and then scored by a verifier. However, producing more candidates does not by itself guarantee that the final selector can distinguish genuinely supported answers from plausible errors. Recent work improves selection mechanisms by using richer sig-nals than raw majority. Taubenfeld et al. [ 15 ] show that confidence-weighted voting can reduce the number of required samples by exploiting the model’s own confidence signal, and emphasize the importance of within-question discrimination. Ranked Voting [ 19 ]replaces simple frequency counting with rank-based scores to better preserve high-quality minority answers. Self-Certainty [ 9] mea-sures the divergence between the predicted token distribution and a uniform distribution, showing that correct and incorrect answers can form separable clusters in confidence space. DistriVoting [ 24 ]further models trajectory confidence as a mixture distribution and links the separation between confidence modes to voting accuracy. These findings collectively suggest that the model’s internal confi-dence signals contain rich information for distinguishing correct from incorrect answers within the same query context. Nevertheless, they still largely evaluate answers under a single query-conditioned evidence view. When biased or noisy evidence is prioritized under a query-conditioned context, wrong answers may appear plausible or confident, leaving the second challenge unresolved: the selector lacks a discriminative axis beyond repeated inference over the same retrieval perspective. CQC-RAG addresses this limitation through cross-query consistency evaluation, which tests answer reliability beyond a single query-conditioned evidence view. 

## 3 Methodology 

In this section, we present the CQC-RAG framework. Figure 1 and Algorithm 1 provide an overview of the proposed CQC-RAG. We begin by introducing some preliminaries, followed by the query rewriting mechanism designed to generate semantically equivalent but syntactically diverse query variants. We then de-scribe the cross-query reasoning and evidence extraction process. Finally, we detail the cross-query consistency confidence estimation strategy for candidate answer selection. 

## 3.1 Preliminaries 

For tasks that heavily rely on external knowledge, a standard RAG instance can be formalized as the triplet (𝑞, D, 𝛼 ). Here, 𝑞 denotes the input query; D represents the retrieved external knowledge cor-pus containing large amounts of factual information; and 𝛼 denotes Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Sun et al. 

Algorithm 1 Framework of CQC-RAG                                                                                                          

> Input: Original query 𝑞 𝑜𝑟𝑔 , Retrieved documents D
> Parameter: Paraphrase count 𝑁 ,Penalty coefficient 𝜆 (·) ,Models
> {𝑀 rewrite , 𝑀 rerank , 𝑀 reason , 𝑀 eval }
> Output: Final answer ˆ𝛼
> Stage 1: Parallel Rewriting
> 1: Q𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎 ←𝑀 rewrite (𝑞 𝑜𝑟𝑔 , 𝑁 )⊲Generate diverse queries under constraints
> 2: Q ← { 𝑞 𝑜𝑟𝑔 } ∪ Q 𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎 ⊲Form the multi-view query set
> Stage 2: Multi-view Reranking & Reasoning
> 3: Initialize candidate set A ← ∅
> 4: for each 𝑞 𝑖 ∈ Q in parallel do
> 5: 𝐶 𝑖 ←𝑀 rerank (𝑞 𝑖 ,D ) ⊲Obtain view-specific context
> 6: A ← A ∪ { 𝑀 reason (𝐶 𝑖 , 𝑞 𝑖 ) } ⊲Generate pair (𝛼 𝑖 , 𝐸 𝑖 )via strict protocol
> 7: end for Stage 3: Candidate Selection
> 8: for each candidate (𝛼 𝑘 , 𝐸 𝑘 ) ∈ A do
> 9: 𝑃 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠 ← ∅
> 10: for each query view 𝑞 𝑗 ∈ Q do
> 11: (ℓYes , ℓ No ) ← 𝑀 eval (Valid |𝛼 𝑘 , 𝐸 𝑘 , 𝑞 𝑗 )
> 12: 𝑃 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠 .append (exp (ℓYes )
> exp (ℓYes )+ exp (ℓNo ))⊲Normalize logits
> 13: end for
> 14: 𝜇 𝑘 ←Mean (𝑃 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠 )
> 15: 𝑆 (𝛼 𝑘 ) ← 𝜇 𝑘 −𝜆 (𝜇 𝑘 ) · Var (𝑃 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠 )
> 16: end for
> 17: return ˆ𝛼 ←arg max 𝛼 𝑘 𝑆 (𝛼 𝑘 )

the expected correct answer. The primary goal of an RAG system is to retrieve a relevant contextual subset 𝐶 = {𝑐 1, 𝑐 2, ..., 𝑐 𝑚 } ⊂ D 

associated with 𝑞 , and leverage the informational content within to formulate a coherent and accurate response 𝛼 .In our proposed framework, we denote the user’s original query as 𝑞 𝑜𝑟𝑔 . Through the parallel rewriting mechanism, we generate a set of semantically isomorphic paraphrased queries, denoted as 

Q𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎 = {𝑞 1, 𝑞 2, ..., 𝑞 𝑁 }. Since the original query 𝑞 𝑜𝑟𝑔 is also in-volved during inference, the entire set of queries utilized for reason-ing is denoted as Q = {𝑞 𝑜𝑟𝑔 , 𝑞 1, 𝑞 2, ..., 𝑞 𝑁 }. For each query in this set, the model performs parallel inference to yield a corresponding set of candidate answers and evidence spans, denoted as A = {𝛼 𝑖 }| Q |  

> 𝑖 =1

.Our objective is to identify the final answer ˆ𝛼 from A that exhibits the highest cross-query consistency. 

## 3.2 Query Rewriting for Controlled Diversity 

Existing multi-path reasoning methods, exemplified by Self-Consistency [ 20 ], derive diversity from temperature sampling during decoding. All reasoning paths share the same query and the same reason-ing context. As discussed in Section 1, this approach suffers from a fundamental limitation: the diversity is uncontrollable (high temper-ature risks unfaithfulness while low temperature yields redundant paths), and it cannot address the sensitivity of retrieval outcomes to query formulation [ 2 ]. Multi-query rewriting approaches such as DMQR-RAG [ 12 ] generate diverse query variants across multiple information levels (information-equivalent, information-expanded, and information-reduced) to improve retrieval coverage. However, DMQR-RAG merges all retrieved documents into a single pool for one-pass generation, using query diversity solely to expand the document pool rather than to produce differentiated reasoning contexts for independent inference. Our approach takes a distinct perspective: we leverage query rewriting not to expand retrieval coverage, but to produce multiple differentiated reasoning contexts based on the same fixed document pool D via query-specific reranking, enabling cross-query answer verification. The key insight, formalized as the Cross-Query Con-sistency Hypothesis in Section 1, is that a correct answer should maintain high confidence across diverse query perspectives, while a hallucinated answer supported by spurious or noisy evidence should exhibit instability under query variation. This verification objective imposes a specific requirement on the rewriting strat-egy: all rewritten queries must be strictly semantically equivalent to 𝑞 𝑜𝑟𝑔 , targeting the same factual answer. Unlike DMQR-RAG’s information-level rewrites that deliberately alter the semantic scope to retrieve broader or more focused documents, our rewriting pre-serves strict semantic equivalence because any semantic drift be-tween queries would invalidate the premise of cross-query con-sistency. Answers generated from queries with different semantic scopes are not meaningfully comparable for consistency evaluation. We formalize this reasoning process as follows. Let 𝐼 denote the user’s latent semantic intent and let 𝑃 (𝑞 | 𝐼 ) represent the distribution over possible query formulations that express the same intent 𝐼 . Since the reasoning context is determined by the query through reranking, we write 𝐶 (𝑞 ) for the top-𝑘 context produced by reranking D with respect to 𝑞 . The probability of answer 𝛼 given intent 𝐼 can then be expressed as: 

𝑃 (𝛼 | 𝐼 ) =

∫

𝑃 (𝛼 | 𝐶 (𝑞 ), 𝑞 ) 𝑃 (𝑞 | 𝐼 ) 𝑑𝑞. (1) Since this integral is intractable in the discrete text space, we ap-proximate it by averaging over the finite sample set Q of rewritten queries, each treated as a sample from 𝑃 (𝑞 | 𝐼 ):

𝑃 (𝛼 | 𝐼 ) ≈ 1

|Q| ∑︁ 𝑞 𝑖 ∈ Q 

𝑃 (𝛼 | 𝐶 𝑖 , 𝑞 𝑖 ), (2) where 𝐶 𝑖 = 𝐶 (𝑞 𝑖 ) denotes the query-specific reasoning context ob-tained by reranking D with respect to 𝑞 𝑖 . Unlike standard ensemble methods where all members share the same input, each 𝑞 𝑖 here produces its own reasoning context 𝐶 𝑖 from the shared document pool. This distinction is operationally critical: the averaging process attenuates the spurious, context-dependent correlations that may accidentally support a hallucinated answer under a single query formulation, while preserving semantic signals that are consistently supported across multiple reasoning contexts. To maximize the quality of this approximation, the paraphrased query set Q𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑎 must satisfy two requirements: (1) strict semantic equivalence with the user’s intent 𝐼 , ensuring all queries target the same factual answer; and (2) maximal syntactic diversity, ensuring different queries induce different document orderings and thus different reasoning contexts. We implement this through a few-shot prompting strategy governed by two dimensions of constraints: (1) Hard constraints. Given that any alteration of named enti-ties may lead to retrieval drift, we instruct the LLM to strictly freeze all named entities, preserving their literal forms to ensure all generated 𝑞 𝑖 are anchored to the same factual baseline. CQC-RAG: Robust Retrieval-Augmented Generation via Cross-Query Consistency Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

(2) Soft constraints. We restructure 𝑞 𝑜𝑟𝑔 across three dimen-sions to maximize syntactic diversity while maintaining se-mantic equivalence: 

• Lexical perturbation : Synonym substitution for non-entity predicates to resolve lexical mismatch between queries and documents, thereby increasing the likelihood that different document passages are promoted during reranking. 

• Syntactic restructuring : Alteration of the syntactic tree structure through active/passive voice switching and clause reordering, producing queries that emphasize different as-pects of the same intent. 

• Pragmatic modal shift : Mixing interrogative forms with imperative instructions. This hybrid strategy produces queries that stylistically align with diverse document gen-res, accommodating passages written in different rhetori-cal modes. 

## 3.3 Cross-Query Reasoning 

Given the rewritten query set Q = {𝑞 𝑜𝑟𝑔 , 𝑞 1, 𝑞 2, . . . , 𝑞 𝑁 }, we per-form cross-query reranking and reasoning to translate the query-level diversity established in the previous stage into differentiated reasoning outcomes. 

Query-specific reranking. For each query 𝑞 𝑖 ∈ Q , we apply a reranking model 𝑀 rerank over the shared initial document pool D

to construct a query-specific reasoning context 𝐶 𝑖 = 𝑀 rerank (𝑞 𝑖 , D) .Since the reranker scores each document based on its semantic relevance to the specific query 𝑞 𝑖 , syntactically different queries naturally produce different document orderings and thus different top-𝑘 contexts. Crucially, no new documents are introduced dur-ing this process and the only variation is in which passages are promoted to the top-𝑘 positions. This design isolates the effect of document prioritization from retrieval coverage: any performance gains of CQC-RAG over single-query baselines cannot be attributed to seeing more documents, but rather to the cross-query consistency mechanism that operates on the resulting variation in reasoning contexts. 

Evidence-grounded reasoning. We distribute the query-specific reasoning contexts {𝐶 𝑖 } and their corresponding queries to the rea-soning model 𝑀 reason in parallel. To enforce faithfulness to the source text and mitigate hallucinations, we implement a strict evidence-grounded reasoning protocol: the LLM is explicitly in-structed to first locate and extract the specific segment from 𝐶 𝑖 

that answers the query, defined as the supporting evidence span 𝐸 𝑖 .Subsequently, the model is constrained to derive the final answer 𝛼 𝑖 

based solely on 𝐸 𝑖 . All |Q| reasoning paths execute in parallel, en-abling the framework to scale with minimal latency overhead. This process yields a set of reasoning tuples {( 𝛼 𝑖 , 𝐸 𝑖 )} | Q |  

> 𝑖 =1

. These tuples serve as the candidate pool for cross-query consistency evaluation. 

## 3.4 Cross-Query Consistency Confidence Estimation 

The core contribution of CQC-RAG lies in shifting the paradigm of answer evaluation from a single reasoning context to cross-query consistency. Existing confidence estimation approaches—whether based on majority voting frequency [ 20 ], confidence-weighted vot-ing [ 15 ], token distribution certainty [ 9], or distributional filtering [ 24 ]—evaluate candidates within the same query’s reasoning con-text and cannot reliably detect hallucinations reinforced by biased or noisy evidence under one particular query formulation. For any candidate answer 𝛼 and its supporting evidence span 𝐸 ,we define the cross-query consistency score 𝑆 (𝛼 ) in Eq. (3): 

𝑆 (𝛼 ) = E𝑞 ∼Q [𝑃 (Valid | 𝛼, 𝐸, 𝑞 )] 

| {z }

> Semantic Consensus

−𝜆 (𝜇 ) · Var 𝑞 ∼Q [𝑃 (Valid | 𝛼, 𝐸, 𝑞 )] 

| {z }

> Cross-Query Instability

,

(3) where 𝜇 = E𝑞 ∼Q [𝑃 (Valid | 𝛼, 𝐸, 𝑞 )] denotes the mean validation score. The evaluation is performed over answer-evidence pairs 

(𝛼, 𝐸 ) rather than over the full reasoning context 𝐶 𝑖 : since 𝐸 distills the relevant information from 𝐶 𝑖 into a focused evidence span, the evaluator can assess whether the evidence semantically supports the answer under each query perspective without being confounded by irrelevant passages. Importantly, since 𝐸 is a direct extraction of factual content from the source documents, its validity as sup-porting evidence does not depend on the specific syntactic form of the query—any semantically equivalent query formulation should recognize the same factual statement as valid support. To compute 𝑃 (Valid | 𝛼, 𝐸, 𝑞 ), we leverage the auto-regressive nature of the evaluator model 𝑀 eval . Rather than generating a free-form judgment (which would introduce additional variance from the generation process itself), we perform a single forward pass over a verification prompt and extract the logits corresponding to the “Yes” and “No” tokens ( ℓYes , ℓ No ), normalizing them over a restricted binary space: 

𝑃 (Valid | 𝛼, 𝐸, 𝑞 ) = exp (ℓYes )

exp (ℓYes ) + exp (ℓNo ) . (4) This logits-based evaluation offers two advantages over generation-based alternatives: (1) it eliminates the stochasticity of open-ended generation, producing deterministic confidence estimates that en-able meaningful cross-query comparison; and (2) the restricted binary normalization mitigates the acquiescence bias where models disproportionately favor affirmative responses during open-ended generation. To further penalize candidates that achieve artificially inflated scores through superficial matching on a minority of views, we design the penalty coefficient to be adaptive: 𝜆 (𝜇 ) = 𝜆 0 · 𝜇 , where 𝜆 0

is a base hyperparameter. This dynamic mechanism imposes stricter variance constraints (higher penalty) on candidates with high mean scores, ensuring their overall rank is driven by genuine cross-query robustness rather than being skewed by a few extreme outlier scores. Conversely, it provides necessary tolerance for candidates with generally lower confidence. To mitigate the tendency of models to rate their own generations higher than others [ 27 ], in our experiments we employ a separate LLM distinct from the inference model to perform this confidence evaluation task. 

## 4 Experiments 4.1 Datasets and Evaluation Metrics 

To demonstrate the effectiveness of CQC-RAG, we evaluate CQC-RAG on four open-domain question answering benchmarks span-ning diverse retrieval challenges: Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Sun et al. 

(1) TriviaQA [ 8] is a large-scale dataset that requires factual knowledge retrieval. We evaluate our method on a standard open-domain split containing 2,000 queries. The associated retrieval cor-pus is constructed from a comprehensive Wikipedia dump, and candidate passages are retrieved using a dense retriever. (2) PopQA [14 ] is a long-tail knowledge dataset. To explicitly evaluate the model’s reliance on external knowledge, we use its challenging long-tail subset, which comprises 1,399 queries. In this subset, the target entities receive fewer than 100 monthly Wikipedia page views, making parametric memory insufficient and external retrieval essential. For both single-hop benchmarks, we adopt the same experimen-tal settings as [1]. (3) HotpotQA [ 4] and (4) MuSiQue [ 18 ] are two multi-hop QA datasets involving comparison, synthesis, and bridge-type reason-ing across multiple documents. Following the standard multi-hop evaluation setting established in previous work [ 4 ], we randomly sample 1,000 queries from the validation set of each dataset and extract all candidate passages (both supporting facts and distrac-tors) from the original annotations of the sampled queries. This distractor-inclusive corpus setting rigorously tests the model’s abil-ity to identify multi-hop reasoning paths amid highly confusing but topically related information. We adopt two complementary metrics following standard open-domain QA evaluation practices: 

• Exact Match (EM) : The predicted answer string is nor-malized and compared against all acceptable ground-truth answers after the same normalization. A prediction scores 1 if the normalized prediction exactly equals any normalized ground-truth, and 0 otherwise. The maximum score across all ground-truth variants is taken for each sample. 

• F1-score (F1) : The normalized prediction and ground-truth are tokenized by whitespace. Precision is computed as the fraction of prediction tokens appearing in the ground-truth, recall as the fraction of ground-truth tokens appearing in the prediction, and F1-score is the harmonic mean. Again, the maximum over all ground-truth variants is reported. We report the average of EM and F1 as a combined indicator. 

## 4.2 Baselines 

We compare CQC-RAG with some widely-used baseline methods. (1) Standard RAG. We evaluate three representative instruction-tuned LLMs under a standard retrieve-then-generate pipeline: Mistral-7B-Instruct [ 7], Qwen3-8B [ 23 ], and LLaMA-3.1-8B-Instruct [ 16 ]. Each model retrieves the top-𝑘 documents and generates answers with greedy decoding. (2) Multi-path RAG. These methods generate multiple candi-date answers and apply diverse selection strategies. Self-Certainty [ 9] computes a KL-divergence-based certainty score over the full output vocabulary distribution and se-lects the answer with the highest certainty. DMQR-RAG [ 12 ]generates multiple query variants across different informa-tion levels, merges the retrieved documents from all variants into a single pool, and performs one-pass generation on the merged context. Speculative RAG [ 21 ] clusters the retrieved documents into diverse subsets and generates multiple draft answers via a lightweight drafting model, then employs a larger verifier model to select the best draft based on self-reflection scores. SPARC-RAG [ 25 ] implements an adaptive sequential-parallel multi-agent framework where specialized agents handle query rewriting, context management, answer generation, and answer evaluation across iterative rounds. We evaluate its unfinetuned version using Qwen3-8B as the backbone for all agent components. For a fair comparison, all multi-path baselines are evaluated with the same backbone model and retrieval infrastructure as CQC-RAG, while their candidate counts and sampling temperatures follow the configurations reported in the original papers. 

## 4.3 Experimental Settings 

4.3.1 Implementation Details. We implement CQC-RAG using Qwen3-8B as 𝑀 reason (with thinking mode disabled for fair comparison) and Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 as 𝑀 eval . For query rewriting, we set tem-perature=0.7 to ensure sufficient syntactic diversity; for reasoning, we use greedy decoding (temperature=0) to produce deterministic answers. The logits-based evaluation is inherently deterministic. We set 𝑁 = 4 (determined by the sensitivity analysis) and 𝜆 0 = 0.5

as default hyperparameters. For the reranker model, we use BGE-reranker-v2-m3 [ 3] to obtain the top-𝑘 query-specific context for each query variant. We set the reranking cutoff 𝑘 = 5 for single-hop datasets (TriviaQA, PopQA) and 𝑘 = 10 for multi-hop datasets (MuSiQue, HotpotQA), since multi-hop questions require synthesiz-ing evidence across multiple documents and benefit from a larger reasoning context. This top-𝑘 setting is applied uniformly to both CQC-RAG and all baselines to ensure a fair comparison. 

4.3.2 Reproducibility. The only source of randomness in CQC-RAG is the query rewriting stage (temperature=0.7). For the main comparison (Table 1), we report results averaged over 5 random seeds (42, 123, 456, 789, 1024) with standard deviation to ensure statistical robustness. More details regarding parallel rewriting can be found in Appendix. For analysis experiments, we report results from a single representative run to isolate the effect of individual components; the relative performance trends are consistent across seeds. All other pipeline components are fully deterministic. 

## 4.4 Main Results 

CQC-RAG achieves state-of-the-art overall performance. CQC-RAG attains the highest Avg on three out of four datasets, including both single-hop benchmarks (TriviaQA: 65.19%; PopQA: 50.03%) and the multi-hop (MuSiQue: 38.38%). On TriviaQA, CQC-RAG achieves +4.72 percentage points Avg advantage over DMQR-RAG, and on MuSiQue the improvement over SPARC-RAG reaches +2.24 percentage points Avg. Compared with its own backbone model Qwen3-8B under standard RAG, CQC-RAG improves TriviaQA EM by +10.47 percentage points and MuSiQue EM by +20.32 percentage points, demonstrating that our cross-query consistency mechanism extracts substantially more reasoning capability from the identical retrieval infrastructure and base LLM. 

Superiority over multi-path selection methods. Self-Certainty, which applies confidence-based selection over temperature-sampled candidates from the same reasoning context, achieves modest gains CQC-RAG: Robust Retrieval-Augmented Generation via Cross-Query Consistency Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Table 1: Performance comparison on the single-hop (TriviaQA, PopQA) and multi-hop (MuSiQue, HotpotQA) datasets using EM, F1, and average scores. Method Single-hop Multi-hop TriviaQA PopQA MuSiQue HotpotQA                                                                                                                                            

> EM F1 AVG. EM F1 AVG. EM F1 AVG. EM F1 AVG.
> Standard RAG
> Mistral-7B-Instruct 39.13 54.21 46.67 25.73 36.79 31.26 3.80 14.13 8.97 6.60 16.62 11.61 Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 54.35 64.40 59.38 42.96 50.35 46.66 14.50 21.22 17.86 16.50 23.19 19.85 Qwen3-8B 49.18 63.61 56.40 40.67 49.59 45.13 12.30 24.32 18.31 12.60 25.63 19.12
> Multi-path RAG
> Self-Certainty 51.10 ±0.40 61.30 ±0.40 56.20 42.00 ±0.20 48.00 ±0.30 45.00 9.40 ±0.10 15.20 ±0.30 12.30 52.20 ±0.40 65.00 ±0.30 58.60 Speculative RAG 54.44 64.03 59.24 37.88 42.29 40.09 14.90 20.56 17.73 33.00 42.05 37.53 DMQR-RAG 54.89 66.04 60.47 46.46 53.31 49.89 23.50 33.92 28.71 54.70 68.56 61.63
> SPARC-RAG 36.68 47.34 42.01 30.38 40.59 35.49 30.50 41.78 36.14 42.20 58.99 50.60
> CQC-RAG 59.65 ±0.35 70.73 ±0.29 65.19 46.86 ±0.28 53.19 ±0.22 50.03 32.62 ±0.30 44.13 ±0.25 38.38 52.50 ±0.59 67.60 ±0.44 60.05

on single-hop datasets (TriviaQA EM 51.10%). However, its perfor-mance severely degrades on MuSiQue (EM 9.40%), where complex multi-hop queries amplify retrieval noise that single-perspective confidence signals fail to detect. CQC-RAG circumvents this epis-temic blind spot by verifying answer stability based on cross-query consistency, delivering a massive +23.22 percentage points EM improvement over Self-Certainty on MuSiQue. 

Advantage over multi-query expansion. DMQR-RAG also employs query rewriting but merges all retrieved documents into a single pool for one-pass generation, leveraging query diversity solely to maximize retrieval coverage. In contrast, CQC-RAG out-performs DMQR-RAG in EM across TriviaQA (+4.76 percentage points), MuSiQue (+9.12 percentage points), and PopQA (+0.40 percentage points). Because both methods share the exact same retrieval infrastructure and CQC-RAG does not expand the doc-ument budget (all rewritten queries rerank the same fixed pool), these gains are strictly attributable to the cross-query consistency evaluation rather than broader document recall. This is further cor-roborated on PopQA: both methods achieve near-identical F1 scores, indicating comparable semantic coverage, yet CQC-RAG’s higher EM highlights its superior precision in exact answer extraction. 

Robustness against multi-agent reasoning. SPARC-RAG em-ploys iterative multi-agent reasoning with adaptive depth and width control. While it achieves competitive performance on MuSiQue, its efficacy drops precipitously on single-hop tasks (TriviaQA: 36.68% EM; PopQA: 30.38% EM). We attribute this to the tendency of its unfinetuned multi-agent pipeline to generate comprehensive but excessively verbose responses, severely penalizing exact-match evaluation on datasets demanding concise entity extraction. CQC-RAG’s evidence-grounded protocol and cross-query consistency scoring provide more effective precision control, achieving strong performance across both single-hop and multi-hop tasks without such precision degradation. 

Analysis of HotpotQA performance. HotpotQA is the only dataset where CQC-RAG ranks second (Avg 60.05%), trailing DMQR-RAG. We attribute this gap to HotpotQA’s structural reliance on document titles as bridge entities: questions frequently require matching specific titles, where the retrieval signal is title matching rather than content matching. Since our rewriting preserves entities and modifies only content-level syntax, it produces limited variation in title-level relevance, reducing the effectiveness of query-specific reranking on this dataset. Notably, DMQR-RAG’s information-expanded queries can introduce additional title-relevant terms that directly improve title-level retrieval, explaining its advantage on this particular dataset structure. 

## 4.5 Ablation Study and Selection Strategy Analysis 

4.5.1 Component Ablation. To quantify the contribution of each CQC-RAG component, we systematically remove or replace individ-ual modules while keeping the rest of the pipeline intact (Table 2). All variants use 𝑁 = 4 paraphrases from a single representative run. We organize the analysis by the three stages of CQC-RAG’s pipeline: rewriting, reasoning, and evaluation. 

Rewriting stage. The w/o Rewriting variant replaces the query rewriting mechanism with temperature sampling: the original query is used for a single reranking pass, and 𝑁 =4 diverse answers are generated via stochastic decoding on the shared reasoning context. The w/o Query-specific Reranking variant retains query rewriting but reranks only with 𝑞 𝑜𝑟𝑔 , sharing the identical top-𝑘 document ordering across all query variants. On TriviaQA, removing rewriting reduces EM by 0.52 percentage points and removing query-specific reranking reduces EM by 1.24 percentage points, confirming that both components contribute to producing the differentiated reasoning contexts that CQC-RAG relies on for cross-query verification. The larger degradation from removing reranking indicates that even with diverse queries, the consistency mechanism cannot function effectively without differ-entiated document orderings. On MuSiQue, both variants show EM decreases while F1 in-creases. For w/o Rewriting , temperature sampling generates mul-tiple candidate answers from the same reasoning context. Since answers to multi-hop questions typically require compositional rea-soning over multiple evidence pieces, temperature sampling may occasionally produce answers that contain partially correct enti-ties, attributes, or descriptive spans, thereby improving token-level F1. However, such answer-level diversity cannot replace the multi-path evidence construction enabled by query rewriting. Without rewritten queries, the model can only reason over a single retrieval context, making it more prone to errors in final answer boundaries, Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Sun et al. 

Table 2: Ablation study of CQC-RAG in the rewriting, reasoning and evaluation stages on TriviaQA and MuSiQue. Method TriviaQA MuSiQue                                            

> EM F1 AVG. EM F1 AVG.
> CQC-RAG 60.39 71.57 65.98 32.90 44.13 38.52
> Rewriting Stage
> w/o Rewriting 59.87 (-0.52 pp) 70.97 (-0.60 pp) 65.42 (-0.56 pp) 32.50 (-0.40 pp) 44.43 (+0.30 pp) 38.47 (-0.05 pp) w/o Query-specific Reranking 59.15 (-1.24 pp) 69.75 (-1.82 pp) 64.45 (-1.53 pp) 32.50 (-0.40 pp) 46.10 (+1.97 pp) 39.30 (+0.78 pp)
> Reasoning Stage
> w/o Evidence-grounded Protocol 44.47 (-15.92 pp) 58.91 (-12.66 pp) 51.69 (-14.29 pp) 24.30 (-8.60 pp) 37.93 (-6.20 pp) 31.12 (-7.40 pp)
> Evaluation Stage
> w/o Cross-query Evaluation 59.57 (-0.82 pp) 70.93 (-0.64 pp) 65.25 (-0.73 pp) 31.40 (-1.50 pp) 41.84 (-2.29 pp) 36.62 (-1.90 pp) w/o Separate Evaluator 57.83 (-2.56 pp) 70.08 (-1.49 pp) 63.96 (-2.02 pp) 32.60 (-0.30 pp) 43.95 (-0.18 pp) 38.33 (-0.19 pp)

entity normalization, or compositional reasoning, which leads to a decrease in exact match. For w/o Query-specific Reranking , the increase in F1 can be attrib-uted to the fact that candidate evidence not ranked under query-specific constraints may contain more content that partially over-laps with the gold answer, thereby improving partial-match F1. However, because all rewritten query variants share the same top-𝑘 

document ordering determined by 𝑞 𝑜𝑟𝑔 , documents that are more relevant to a particular rewritten query may not be promoted to higher ranks. This weakens the alignment between each query variant and its corresponding evidence, making it harder for the model to produce a fully matched final answer. In other words, the F1 improvements observed in the ablated models on the multi-hop dataset mainly reflect increased partial-match coverage rather than improved final-answer precision. 

Reasoning stage. The w/o Evidence-grounded Protocol variant removes the “extract evidence first, then answer” constraint, instead directly generating answers from the full reasoning context without structured evidence extraction. This causes the most severe degra-dation across both datasets: TriviaQA EM drops by 15.92 percentage points and MuSiQue EM by 8.60 percentage points. Without evi-dence grounding, the model is unconstrained by source text and produces fluent but unfaithful answers. 

Evaluation stage. The w/o Cross-query Evaluation variant eval-uates each candidate answer only against its originating query, eliminating the cross-query verification. This reduces MuSiQue EM by -1.50 percentage points and F1 by -2.29 percentage points, the largest evaluation-stage degradation, confirming that cross-query verification is most valuable when multiple evidence fragments must be consistently validated. The w/o Separate Evaluator variant uses the reasoning model (Qwen3-8B) itself as the evaluator instead of the independent Mistral-7B. This causes TriviaQA EM to drop by -2.56 percentage points, the second-largest overall degradation, validating that self-enhancement bias [ 27 ] materially compromises answer discrimination when the same model both generates and evaluates answers. We further investigate this effect in the evaluator model analysis below. 

4.5.2 Selection Strategy Comparison. To further validate the effec-tiveness of CQC-RAG’s cross-query consistency scoring, we fix the candidate pool produced by CQC-RAG’s rewriting and reasoning stages and apply five alternative selection strategies, as shown in 

Table 3: Comparison of the effects of different selection strategies. Method TriviaQA MuSiQue                                          

> EM F1 AVG. EM F1 AVG. Majority Voting 58.24 68.41 63.33 27.00 40.32 33.66
> Confidence Score
> Probability 58.34 68.97 63.66 28.40 38.70 33.55 Perplexity 58.14 68.76 63.45 27.80 38.26 33.03 Yes-Probability 58.96 70.34 64.65 26.80 37.82 32.31 LLM-as-a-Judge 57.93 69.82 63.88 27.10 41.02 34.06
> CQC-RAG 60.39 71.57 65.98 32.90 44.13 38.52

Table 3. This controls for the quality of candidates and tests only the selection mechanism. Specifically, Majority Voting clusters semantically equivalent answers using BGE-M3 embeddings and selects the cluster with the most members. Probability selects the answer with the highest generation probability (product of per-token logprobs). Perplexity 

selects the answer with the lowest perplexity. Yes-Probability com-putes the probability of the model generating “Yes” given the can-didate answer, the retrieved evidence, and its originating question— serving as a single-query version of CQC-RAG’s logits-based eval-uation. LLM-as-a-Judge directly employs an LLM as an evaluator by providing all candidate answers and the original question to 

𝑀 eval (Mistral-7B), prompting it to select the best answer through free-form generation. 

All alternative strategies perform within a narrow band. 

On TriviaQA, the five alternatives achieve Avg scores between 63.33% and 64.65%, a spread of only 1.32 percentage points. CQC-RAG breaks out of this range at 65.98%, which is +1.33 percentage points over the best alternative Yes-Probability. On MuSiQue, the gap is more pronounced: alternatives range from 32.31% to 34.06% Avg, while CQC-RAG achieves 38.52%. This confirms that the cross-query consistency dimension provides a qualitatively different and stronger signal for answer discrimination than any single-context metric and is especially effective for multi-hop reasoning where noise-induced hallucinations are more prevalent. 

Confidence-based metrics cannot distinguish noise-induced hallucinations. Probability, Perplexity, and Yes-Probability each CQC-RAG: Robust Retrieval-Augmented Generation via Cross-Query Consistency Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                             

> Number of paraphrases
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> 75
> Performance (%)
> 60.29 60.08 60.18 60.08 59.88 59.47 59.57 59.26 59.26
> 71.11 70.92 71.04 71.03 70.88 70.50 70.58 70.39 70.73
> N= 4 (selected )
> EM
> F1
> (a) TriviaQA 2345678910
> Number of paraphrases
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> Performance (%)
> 32.60 32.70 33.00 33.20 33.40 33.30 33.40 33.50 33.50
> 45.37 45.56 45.82 46.26 46.34 46.25 46.24 46.35 46.44
> N= 4 (selected )
> EM
> F1
> (b) MuSiQue

Figure 2: Performance comparison on the TriviaQA and MuSiQue datasets across different paraphrase counts. 

evaluate answers using a single confidence signal without cross-query comparison. Their poor MuSiQue performance (Avg 32–34%) reveals a fundamental limitation: a hallucinated answer may receive high confidence when it is reinforced by biased or noisy evidence under one particular query-conditioned context, but this signal is indistinguishable from a genuinely correct answer within a single reasoning context. These results demonstrate that cross-query con-sistency scoring effectively utilizes multi-view information to filter stochastic noise, providing a more reliable and balanced answer selection mechanism. 

## 4.6 Sensitivity Analysis of Paraphrase Count 

To determine the optimal number of query rewrites and validate that CQC-RAG’s gains are not merely an artifact of increased candi-date count, we evaluate performance as a function of 𝑁 . The results are presented in Figure 2. 

Performance remains stable with a small number of para-phrases. On TriviaQA, the best performance is achieved at 𝑁 = 2,with 60.29% EM and 71.11% F1. Increasing 𝑁 from 2 to 5 leads to only minor fluctuations, with EM remaining around 60% and F1 around 71%. This suggests that a small set of query rewrites is already sufficient to provide diverse reasoning contexts for cross-query consistency verification. 

Excessive paraphrases bring limited or diminishing re-turns. On TriviaQA, performance gradually decreases when 𝑁 

becomes larger, dropping to 59.47% EM at 𝑁 = 7 and 59.26% EM at 𝑁 = 10 , indicating that additional paraphrases may introduce redundancy or lower-quality rewrites. On MuSiQue, performance continues to improve as 𝑁 increases, but the gains are relatively small: EM improves from 33.00% at 𝑁 = 4 to 33.50% at 𝑁 = 10 ,while F1 increases from 45.82% to 46.44%. Thus, although more paraphrases can slightly benefit multi-hop reasoning, the marginal 

Table 4: Comparison of the effects of different evaluator mod-els. Method TriviaQA MuSiQue 

EM F1 AVG. EM F1 AVG. Qwen3-8B 58.24 70.23 64.24 32.60 43.54 38.07 Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 60.80 71.73 66.27 32.80 43.90 38.35 Mistral-7B-Instruct 60.39 71.57 65.98 32.90 44.13 38.52 

improvement becomes limited compared with the additional com-putational cost. Balancing performance, robustness, and computational cost, we adopt 𝑁 = 4 as the default configuration. Although 𝑁 = 2 yields the highest TriviaQA score and larger values of 𝑁 further improve MuSiQue slightly, 𝑁 = 4 provides a strong trade-off across both datasets. It avoids the performance degradation observed on Trivi-aQA with excessive paraphrases while capturing sufficient query diversity for multi-hop reasoning on MuSiQue. 

## 4.7 Evaluator Model Analysis 

As discussed in Section 3.4, we employ a separate evaluator model 

𝑀 eval distinct from the reasoning model 𝑀 reason to mitigate self-enhancement bias, a well-documented phenomenon where LLMs tend to rate their own generated outputs more favorably than those produced by other models. This experiment validates our evaluator design from two complementary perspectives: the critical need for model decoupling, and the generalizability across independent evaluator architectures. 

Necessity of a separate evaluator. The results in Table 4 show that replacing the distinct 𝑀 eval with the reasoning model itself 

𝑀 reason degrades the TriviaQA EM to 58.24%, which is more than 2 percentage points lower than the decoupled configurations. This drop confirms that self-enhancement bias materially compromises the discriminative power of cross-query evaluation. When the eval-uator is biased towards its own reasoning paths, it becomes overly permissive, thereby attenuating the cross-query variance signal that CQC-RAG heavily relies upon to distinguish genuinely supported answers from hallucinations. 

Generalizability across independent evaluators. While de-coupling is important, CQC-RAG is highly robust to the specific choice of the independent evaluator. To verify this, we fix 𝑀 reason 

as Qwen3-8B and employ Mistral-7B-Instruct and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct as two architecturally distinct, similarly-sized evaluators. Both independent evaluators achieve comparable and strong per-formance, maintaining EM fluctuations within a narrow margin. Specifically, the difference in Exact Match scores between the two independent evaluators is as small as 0.41 percentage points on TriviaQA and 0.10 percentage points on MuSiQue. This robustness confirms a key property of CQC-RAG: the confidence estimation mechanism requires only relative semantic consistency in the evalu-ator’s cross-query logits, rather than relying on the absolute calibra-tion of any specific model. When the evaluator remains structurally independent from the reasoning model, the framework tends to deliver robust performance. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Sun et al. 

Table 5: Quantitative analysis of query rewriting quality, measuring both semantic consistency and syntactic diversity.                      

> Dataset Semantic Similarity BLEU-2 Distance Jaccard Distance TriviaQA 0.93 ±0.03 0.55 ±0.14 0.53 ±0.12 MuSiQue 0.94 ±0.03 0.50 ±0.11 0.52 ±0.09

## 4.8 Rewriting Quality Analysis 

A core premise of CQC-RAG is that query rewriting produces se-mantically equivalent yet syntactically diverse queries. To verify this property and address potential concerns regarding semantic drift, we quantitatively evaluate both the semantic consistency and structural diversity of our rewrites. Specifically, we randomly sam-ple 500 queries per dataset and compute three metrics: (1) Seman-tic Similarity , defined as the average cosine similarity between the BGE-M3 embeddings of the original query and its rewrites; (2) 

BLEU-2 Distance , defined as one minus the pairwise BLEU-2 score among the rewrites to measure structural and bigram divergence; and (3) Jaccard Distance , measuring the average proportion of unshared unigrams across all pairs of rewrites. For semantic simi-larity, values closer to 1.0 indicate strict intent preservation, while for BLEU-2 Distance and Jaccard Distance, higher values reflect greater surface-form diversity. As shown in Table 5, the average semantic similarity consistently exceeds 0.93 across both datasets. This is well above the 0.85 thresh-old established in our system design, confirming that the applied hard constraints effectively preserve the original user intent and prevent semantic drift. Simultaneously, the lexical diversity metrics indicate substantial token-level variation, with BLEU-2 Distance and Jaccard Distance averaging between 0.50 and 0.55. This val-idates that our soft constraints successfully introduce sufficient syntactic diversity, which is crucial for producing the differentiated document orderings required in the subsequent reranking stage. 

## 4.9 Computational Overhead Analysis 

To evaluate CQC-RAG’s computational cost, Table 6 compares repre-sentative multi-path RAG methods across three sequential pipeline stages: retrieval routing, LLMs inference, and theoretical parallel latency. 

Generative overhead is on par with standard multi-path methods. Under our default configuration of 𝑁 = 4 rewritten queries, as determined in the sensitivity analysis, CQC-RAG re-quires 6 generative calls: one query-rewriting call and five indepen-dent reasoning calls. First, in terms of the retrieval stage, CQC-RAG requires only 1 retrieval, as all rewritten queries share a single re-trieved document pool. In contrast, other multi-query methods like DMQR-RAG require 5 distinct retrievals, and SPARC-RAG requires 4–16 retrievals due to its iterative loops. Second, for LLM inference stage, CQC-RAG requires only 2 stages: query rewriting and paral-lel reasoning. This sequential profile is identical to DMQR-RAG and Speculative RAG, and significantly faster than SPARC-RAG, which requires up to 12 sequential generation steps across its multi-agent reasoning loop. Because the 5 parallel reasoning paths in CQC-RAG are entirely independent, modern inference engines can execute them concurrently as a single batched inference pass, preventing sequential latency accumulation. 

Cross-query evaluation avoids decoding bottlenecks. The main additional overhead of CQC-RAG comes from cross-query evaluation. We define CQC-RAG’s additional evaluation-related overhead as 𝜖 = 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 + 𝑇 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 _𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 , where 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘 represents the query-specific reranking latency over the shared pool, and 

𝑇 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 _𝑝𝑟𝑒 𝑓 𝑖𝑙𝑙 is the prefill-only evaluation latency. CQC-RAG uses a compact 7B autoregressive LLM as the evaluator, but it does not ask the model to generate full evaluation rationales. Instead, each answer-evidence-query tuple is processed with a single forward pass, and the binary Yes/No logits are directly used for scoring. To run this evaluation stage efficiently, CQC-RAG groups all 5 generated tuples into a single batched prefill pass, allowing the evaluator to score all candidate answers simultaneously without executing separate sequential model calls. In comparison, while Speculative RAG also utilizes a batched pass, it must process a larger batch of 10 drafts containing much longer generated rationales. This prefill-only design avoids sequential decoding during evaluation and therefore reduces the overhead compared with generation-based judging. Because both operations avoid autoregressive token generation, their cumulative latency is computationally marginal. 

Overall latency and cost-reliability trade-offs. Assuming sufficient parallel GPU capacity, CQC-RAG’s parallel latency bot-tleneck is effectively 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒 + 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 + 𝜖 . Since the evaluation latency is negligible ( 𝜖 ≪ 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 ), our end-to-end parallel latency is structurally close to DMQR-RAG and avoids the sequential la-tency accumulation of methods such as SPARC-RAG. Although single-path RAG or unverified Self-Consistency may have lower raw inference latency, they lack the cross-query verifica-tion signal needed to filter noise-induced hallucinations. CQC-RAG therefore introduces a limited evaluation overhead in exchange for improved factual reliability, offering a practical cost-reliability trade-off for scenarios where answer correctness is critical. 

## 5 Conclusion 

In this work, we address the reliability limitations of RAG under single query formulation and noisy evidence. We propose the Cross-Query Consistency Hypothesis, which posits that correct answers grounded in genuinely relevant evidence maintain stable confidence across semantically equivalent but syntactically diverse queries, whereas noise-induced hallucinations exhibit unstable confidence because their support often depends on spurious, query-conditioned evidence patterns. Based on this hypothesis, we develop CQC-RAG, a training-free framework that co-designs controlled query-level diversity injection with cross-query consistency evaluation, oper-ating entirely on a shared document pool without increasing the retrieval budget. CQC-RAG rewrites the original question into meaning-preserving query variants, constructs query-conditioned reasoning contexts through reranking, and selects answers according to confidence stability across these contexts. This design enables answer self-evaluation without external supervision and does not rely on ex-panded retrieval coverage. Experiments on open-domain QA bench-marks demonstrate that CQC-RAG improves answer reliability over representative multi-path RAG baselines, especially in complex CQC-RAG: Robust Retrieval-Augmented Generation via Cross-Query Consistency Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Table 6: Computational complexity and parallel latency decomposition of multi-path RAG methods. The latency represents the theoretical wall-clock time under sufficient parallel GPU capacity. 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 and 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒 denote the latencies of standard reasoning and query rewriting, respectively. 𝑇 𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑓 𝑡 and 𝑇 𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑖 𝑓 𝑦 denote the drafting and verification latencies of Speculative RAG. For SPARC-RAG, 𝑇 agents_d represents the sequential agent latency at iteration depth 𝑑 . For CQC-RAG, 𝜖 represents the mathematically marginal latency of query-specific reranking and prefill-only evaluation. 

Method Retrieval Stage LLM Inference Stage Parallel Latency 

Retrieval Calls Sequential LLM Calls Evaluation Pass Parallel Bottleneck Standard RAG 1 1 None 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 

Self-Certainty 1 1 None 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 

Speculative RAG 1 2 Prefill-only Scoring 𝑇 𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑓 𝑡 + 𝑇 𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑖 𝑓 𝑦 

DMQR-RAG 1–5 2 None 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒 + 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 

SPARC-RAG 4–16 12–48 Full Autoregressive Generation Í𝐷 𝑑 =1 (𝑇 agents_d )

CQC-RAG 1 2 Prefill-only Scoring 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑒 + 𝑇 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑜𝑛 + 𝜖 

multi-hop scenarios where retrieval noise and biased evidence can be amplified. Our work suggests a shift from finding a single opti-mal query toward evaluating answer stability across semantically equivalent query perspectives. 

## A Prompt for Parallel Rewriting A.1 Prompt for Parallel Rewriting on TrivialQA 

Original query: In Buddhism, what is the state of blissful repose or absolute existence by someone relieved of the necessity of rebirth? ======================= Prompt ======================= You are an AI assistant designed to improve the retrieval recall of a RAG system for a trivia question answering task (TriviaQA). Your goal is to generate 4 paraphrased versions of a given user query. ### CRITICAL RULES: 1. **Preserve Entities:** NEVER change or omit proper nouns, dates, song titles, character names, or quoted text (e.g., "The Miami Sound Machine", "Dec 14, 1636", "Winter Wonderland"). These are the keys to finding the answer. 2. **Maintain Semantics:** The paraphrased questions must ask for EXACTLY the same answer as the original. Do not generalize or make the question vague. 3. **Vary Structure:** - Switch between Question formats (Who/What/Which) and Imperative formats (Identify/Name/State). - Switch between Active and Passive voice. - Move the focus of the sentence (e.g., put the date at the beginning or end). 4. **No Hallucination:** Do not add external information that is not present in the original question. ### Few-Shot Examples: **Example 1:** Original: "Whose backing band is known as The Miami Sound Machine?" Paraphrases: 1. "The Miami Sound Machine is the backing band for which famous artist?" (Structure change) 2. "Identify the singer cooperated with the band The Miami Sound Machine." 

(Imperative) 3. "Which musician uses The Miami Sound Machine as their backing group?" (Synonym: group vs band) 4. "Name the performer whose band goes by the name The Miami Sound Machine." (Focus shift) **Example 2:** Original: "According to the proverb, what comes but once a year?" Paraphrases: 1. "What is it that arrives only one time annually, based on the proverb?" (Synonym: once a year -> annually) 2. "Identify the subject of the proverb stating it comes but once ayear." (Structure change) 3. "Which event is described in the proverb as occurring only once a year?" (Question word change) 4. "According to the saying, what happens just a single time per year?" (Synonym: saying vs proverb) **Example 3:** Original: "With a motto of Always Ready, Always There, what US military branch had it’s founding on Dec 14, 1636?" Paraphrases: 1. "Which branch of the US military was founded on Dec 14, 1636, and uses the motto ’Always Ready, Always There’?" (Reordering) 2. "Name the US military force established on Dec 14, 1636, with the slogan ’Always Ready, Always There’." (Synonym: branch -> force) 3. "The motto ’Always Ready, Always There’ belongs to which US service branch founded in 1636?" (Focus on Motto) 4. "Identify the military entity formed on Dec 14, 1636, that says ’Always Ready, Always There’." (Imperative) ### FORMAT Output only the 4 paraphrased questions, one per line. No numbering, no explanations. ======================= Output ======================= Paraphrased queries: 1. What is the state of blissful repose or absolute existence in Buddhism for someone who is no longer bound by the cycle of rebirth? 2. Identify the Buddhist state of blissful repose or absolute existence that is attained by someone freed from the necessity of rebirth. 3. Which Buddhist concept refers to a state of blissful repose or absolute existence for someone who has been relieved of the need for rebirth? 4. In Buddhism, what is the term for the state of blissful Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Sun et al. 

repose or absolute existence that comes from being free of rebirth? 

## A.2 Prompt for Parallel Rewriting on MuSiQue 

Original query: What month did the Tripartite discussions begin between Britain, France, and the country where, despite being headquartered in the nation called the nobilities commonwealth, the top-ranking Warsaw Pact operatives originated? ======================= Prompt ======================= You are an expert AI assistant specializing in query rewriting for complex, multi-hop reasoning tasks. Your goal is to generate 4 paraphrased versions of a given user query to improve retrieval recall in a RAG system. ### DATASET CONTEXT: The queries come from the MuSiQue dataset, which involves multi-hop reasoning. Questions often contain nested clauses, intermediate entities, or multiple constraints that must be satisfied to find the answer. ### CRITICAL RULES: 1. **Preserve Entities & Proper Nouns:** NEVER change, omit, or translate proper nouns (e.g., "La fida ninfa", "A Don", "Marlene McFly"). These are the anchors for retrieval. 2. **Maintain Strict Logic:** The paraphrased question must ask for the EXACT same logical target. Do not drop any constraint (e.g., if it says "in the winter of 2014", do not change it to "in 2014"). 3. **Unpack Nested Structures:** - If the question involves a chain of relations, try to rephrase by changing the word order to highlight different keywords. - You may split long relative clauses into clearer modifier phrases. 4. **Variety in Expression:** - Use imperative forms (Identify/Name/Find). - Use interrogative forms (Who/What/Which). - Invert the sentence structure. ### Few-Shot Examples: **Example 1:** Original: Who is the director of the film that features the song "My Heart Will Go On"? Paraphrases: 1.Name the director of the movie in which the song "My Heart Will Go On" appears. 2.The song "My Heart Will Go On" was featured in a film directed by whom? 3.Identify the filmmaker responsible for the movie containing "My Heart Will Go On". 4.Who directed the motion picture that includes the track "My Heart Will Go On"? **Example 2:** Original: What is the capital of the country that shares a border with the birthplace of Mozart? Paraphrases: 1.Identify the capital city of the nation bordering Mozart’s birthplace. 2.Mozart was born in a city; which country’s capital borders that location? 3.Name the capital of the country adjacent to the place where Mozart was born. 4.Which city serves as the capital for the country bordering Mozart’s birth city? **Example 3:** Original: The creator of the comic strip involving the character Snoopy served in which 

branch of the military? Paraphrases: 1.In which military branch did the creator of the Snoopy comic strip serve? 2.Identify the branch of service of the man who created the character Snoopy. 3.What military service did the author of the comic featuring Snoopy perform? 4.Name the military branch associated with the creator of Snoopy’s comic strip. ### FORMAT Output only the 4 paraphrased questions, one per line. No numbering, no explanations. ======================= Output ======================= Paraphrased queries: 1. What month did the Tripartite discussions start between Britain, France, and the country where the top-ranking Warsaw Pact operatives came from, even though the headquarters of the nobilities commonwealth is located there? 2. In which month did the Tripartite discussions take place between Britain, France, and the nation that is the origin of the top-ranking Warsaw Pact operatives, despite its headquarters being in the nobilities commonwealth? 3. Figure out the month when the Tripartite discussions began between Britain, France, and the country where the top-ranking Warsaw Pact operatives originated, even though the headquarters of the nobilities commonwealth is situated there. 4. Which month marked the beginning of the Tripartite discussions between Britain, France, and the country that is the birthplace of the top-ranking Warsaw Pact operatives, despite the headquarters of the nobilities commonwealth being located in that nation? 

## B Prompt for Multi-view Reasoning 

### Task Requirements: 1. **Search First:** distinctively identify the sentence(s) in the context that directly support the answer. 2. **Quote Verbatim:** You must extract the supporting text EXACTLY as it appears in the context. 3. **Answer Second:** Formulate your answer based ONLY on the extracted evidence. ### Output Format: Answer: [Your concise answer here] Evidence: [Paste the exact sentence from the context here] 

## C Artifacts 

All implementation artifacts used to produce the results reported in this paper, including the CQC-RAG source code, preprocessed datasets, and evaluation scripts, are publicly available at https:// github.com/FrancesPlus/CQC-RAG. 

## References     

> [1] Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-RAG: Learning to Retrieve, Generate, and Critique through Self-Reflection. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 .[2] Tianyu Cao, Neel Bhandari, Akhila Yerukola, Akari Asai, and Maarten Sap. 2026. Out of Style: RAG’s Fragility to Linguistic Variation. In Proceedings of the 19th

CQC-RAG: Robust Retrieval-Augmented Generation via Cross-Query Consistency Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics, EACL 2026 - Volume 1: Long Papers, Rabat, Morocco, March 24-29, 2026 .280–318. [3] Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. 2024. BGE M3-Embedding: Multi-Lingual, Multi-Functionality, Multi-Granularity Text Embeddings Through Self-Knowledge Distillation. CoRR abs/2402.03216 (2024). [4] Bernal Jimenez Gutierrez, Yiheng Shu, Yu Gu, Michihiro Yasunaga, and Yu Su. 2024. HippoRAG: Neurobiologically Inspired Long-Term Memory for Large Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: An-nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024 .[5] Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. 2023. Atlas: Few-shot Learning with Retrieval Augmented Language Models. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 24 (2023), 251:1–251:43. [6] Soyeong Jeong, Jinheon Baek, Sukmin Cho, Sung Ju Hwang, and Jong Park. 2024. Adaptive-RAG: Learning to Adapt Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models through Question Complexity. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), NAACL 2024, Mexico City, Mexico, June 16-21, 2024 . 7036–7050. [7] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, De-vendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de Las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7B. CoRR abs/2310.06825 (2023). [8] Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S. Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2017. TriviaQA: A Large Scale Distantly Supervised Challenge Dataset for Reading Comprehen-sion. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2017, Vancouver, Canada, July 30 - August 4, Volume 1: Long Papers .1601–1611. [9] Zhewei Kang, Xuandong Zhao, and Dawn Song. 2025. Scalable Best-of-N Se-lection for Large Language Models via Self-Certainty. CoRR abs/2502.18581 (2025). [10] Seongyun Lee, Yongrae Jo, Minju Seo, Moontae Lee, and Minjoon Seo. 2026. Lost in the Noise: How Reasoning Models Fail with Contextual Distractors. CoRR 

abs/2601.07226 (2026). [11] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual .[12] Zhicong Li, Jiahao Wang, Zhishu Jiang, Hangyu Mao, Zhongxia Chen, Jiazhen Du, Yuanxing Zhang, Fuzheng Zhang, Di Zhang, and Yong Liu. 2024. DMQR-RAG: Diverse Multi-Query Rewriting for RAG. CoRR abs/2411.13154 (2024). [13] Xinbei Ma, Yeyun Gong, Pengcheng He, Hai Zhao, and Nan Duan. 2023. Query Rewriting for Retrieval-Augmented Large Language Models. CoRR abs/2305.14283 (2023). [14] Alex Mallen, Akari Asai, Victor Zhong, Rajarshi Das, Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. When Not to Trust Language Models: Investigating Effectiveness of Parametric and Non-Parametric Memories. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023 . 9802–9822. [15] Amir Taubenfeld, Tom Sheffer, Eran Ofek, Amir Feder, Ariel Goldstein, Zorik Gekhman, and Gal Yona. 2025. Confidence Improves Self-Consistency in LLMs. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2025, Vienna, Austria, July 27 - August 1, 2025 . 20090–20111. [16] Llama Team. 2024. The Llama 3 Herd of Models. CoRR abs/2407.21783 (2024). [17] Hieu Tran, Zonghai Yao, Zhichao Yang, Junda Wang, Yifan Zhang, Shuo Han, Feiyun Ouyang, and Hong Yu. 2025. RARE: Retrieval-Augmented Reasoning Enhancement for Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2025, Vienna, Austria, July 27 - August 1, 2025 . 18305–18330. [18] Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. MuSiQue: Multihop Questions via Single-hop Question Composition. Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics 10 (2022), 539–554. [19] Weiqin Wang, Yile Wang, and Hui Huang. 2025. Ranked Voting based Self-Consistency of Large Language Models. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics, ACL 2025, Vienna, Austria, July 27 - August 1, 2025 . 14410– 14426. [20] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 .[21] Zilong Wang, Zifeng Wang, Long T. Le, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Vincent Perot, Yuwei Zhang, Anush Mattapalli, Ankur Taly, Jingbo Shang, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. 2025. Speculative RAG: Enhancing Retrieval Aug-mented Generation through Drafting. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025 .[22] Siye Wu, Jian Xie, Jiangjie Chen, Tinghui Zhu, Kai Zhang, and Yanghua Xiao. 2024. How Easily do Irrelevant Inputs Skew the Responses of Large Language Models? CoRR abs/2404.03302 (2024). [23] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jian Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. 2025. Qwen3 Technical Report. CoRR 

abs/2505.09388 (2025). [24] Xizhong Yang, Haotian Zhang, Huiming Wang, and Mofei Song. 2026. Believe Your Model: Distribution-Guided Confidence Calibration. CoRR abs/2603.03872 (2026). [25] Yuxin Yang, Gangda Deng, Ömer Faruk Akgül, Nima Chitsazan, Yash Govilkar, Akasha Tigalappanavara, Shi-Xiong Zhang, Sambit Sahu, and Viktor Prasanna. 2026. SPARC-RAG: Adaptive Sequential-Parallel Scaling with Context Manage-ment for Retrieval-Augmented Generation. CoRR abs/2602.00083 (2026). [26] Nan Zhang, Prafulla Kumar Choubey, Alexander R. Fabbri, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Rui Zhang, Prasenjit Mitra, Caiming Xiong, and Chien-Sheng Wu. 2025. SiReRAG: Indexing Similar and Related Information for Multihop Reasoning. In 

The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025 .[27] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-Judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023 .