Title: In-Context Adaptation of Encoder-Decoder Models in Speech Recognition

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.33865v1

Published Time: Tue, 29 Sep 2026 02:30:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# In-Context Adaptation of Encoder-Decoder Models in Speech Recognition 

Yen Meng Sharon Goldwater Hao Tang 

The Centre for Speech Technology Research, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom 

yen.meng@ed.ac.uk, sgwater@inf.ed.ac.uk, hao.tang@ed.ac.uk 

Abstract —In-context learning offers an appealing approach to adapt automatic speech recognition (ASR) models to new speakers, accents, and domains by providing speech-text pairs as demonstrations at inference time. Recent work shows that some LLM-based speech models are capable of ASR in-context adaptation, when providing interleaved speech-text demonstra-tions. In this work, we ask whether in-context adaptation is an inherent ability for all encoder-decoder models. We study two forms of demonstration, collated and interleaved demonstration, across six encoder-decoder models, spanning conventional cross-attention-based and LLM-based architectures. We find that all tested models are able to perform in-context adaptation out of the box, achieving up to 30% relative improvement in the oracle experiments and up to 23% using first-pass hypotheses. Through controlled experiments on three English datasets, we show that lexical and speaker information both contribute to successful adaptation. While interleaved demonstration is effective in cer-tain cases, collated demonstration brings consistent adaptation across the board. Our results suggest that in-context adaptation for ASR is not unique to specific architectures, training, or demonstration approaches. 

Index Terms —in-context learning, automatic speech recogni-tion, speech LLM, attention encoder-decoder 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

In-context learning (ICL) is the ability to learn new tasks not explicitly seen during training, typically through a few demonstrations (i.e., example-label pairs) provided at infer-ence time. ICL emerged as a special capability in large language models (LLMs) [1], [2], and has since been studied in various speech tasks, such as speech emotion recognition [3]– [5], speech translation [6]–[8], and text-to-speech systems [9], [10], and audio or spoken language understanding [8], [11]– [13]. However, studies of ICL have mostly focused on learning new tasks and overlook the potential of using ICL to adapt to different domains . If models are capable of learning new tasks at inference time, they should also be able to adapt themselves to unseen domains for the tasks seen during training. In this work, we study ICL for adaptation, or in-context adaptation for short. A model that is able to use the demon-strations provided at inference time to improve performance is said to be capable of in-context adaptation. A model capable of in-context adaptation can, for example, adapt itself to a new accent given the examples of that accent in the demon-strations (accent adaptation) or adapt its output preference given the words in the demonstrations (contextual biasing). We focus on automatic speech recognition (ASR), as it is a fertile ground for adapting models to new speakers, accents, dialects, and domains. In this work, we restrict our empirical study to English ASR, enabling controlled comparison across models and datasets. Several prior studies have approached ASR adaptation with ICL [14]–[21]. However, prior studies are often limited to a specific model, such as Whisper [14], [15], [17] and Phi-4-multimodal-instruct [19], [21], [22], or suggest that ICL capability is elicited or reinforced through training [17], [18], [23]. Other studies focus solely on finding demonstrations that improve performance [15], [20], [22], [24] but fail to address what exact properties in demonstrations are the most useful for adaptation. In this work, we study whether modern ASR models can perform in-context adaptation and what properties of demonstrations impact the adaptation the most. Contrary to common belief, demonstrations in ICL for ASR do not nec-essarily need to be interleaved speech and text. We study two demonstration approaches, interleaved demonstration 

(where a transcript is provided immediately after each of several speech examples) and collated demonstration (where all speech examples are provided, followed by all transcripts). We evaluate a diverse set of encoder-decoder models with different architectures and training recipes, including Whisper-large-v2 (Whisper) [25], Canary-1B (Canary) [26], Canary-Qwen-2.5B (Canary-Qwen) [27], Qwen3-ASR-1.7B (Qwen3-ASR) [28], Phi-4-multimodal-instruct (Phi-4-MM) [29], and Qwen2.5-Omni-7B (Qwen2.5-Omni) [30]. We find that all of them are able to perform in-context adaptation out of the box , i.e., without any additional training. All models are able to adapt with collated demonstration, whereas adapting with interleaved demonstration is only possible for those that inherit ICL from large language models (LLMs). We expect the adaptation performance to depend heavily on the demonstrations. To understand what contributes to the adaptation, we study in-context adaptation on L2-Arctic, conducting oracle experiments and controlling the speaker, lexical content, and phonetic content in the demonstrations. We find that sharing both lexical similarity and speaker identity leads to the most performance gains, ranging from 25% to 30% WER reduction across models with collated demonstration. To evaluate in-context adaptation across domains, we extend our analysis to read speech that is less clean (LibriSpeech test-other ) and spontaneous speech (AMI). Demonstrations sharing similar lexical content still consistently lead to performance arXiv:2609.33865v1 [cs.CL] 27 Sep 2026 Fig. 1. Two demonstration approaches for in-context adaptation of encoder-decoder models: (a) Collated demonstration for AED models (top) and for decoder-only/LLM-based models (bottom) and (b) Interleaved demonstration 

> for LLM-based models.

gains, though the limitation of in-context adaptation becomes more obvious. Finally, to confirm our findings, we relax the oracle ex-periments by using first-pass hypotheses. The sizable im-provements are still present when using first-pass hypotheses, closing up to 60% of the gap against the oracle. II. C OLLATED AND INTERLEAVED DEMONSTRATION 

When studying in-context adaptation in ASR, we focus on encoder-decoder models, including models with cross attention (sometimes known as attention-based encoder-decoder models, or AED [25], [31], [32]), and those without (sometimes known as decoder-only models [33], [34]). Recent LLM-based ASR models are of the second kind [18], [28] and still require speech encoders. As the name suggests, an encoder-decoder model has an encoder (Enc) and decoder (Dec), and ASR is done by the generic equation 

y = Dec (Enc (x)) (1) where y is the output transcript when the model receives the audio x as input. The input to the decoder is usually more than just the encoded speech Enc (x), and the additional input is the context that the decoder might adapt to when predicting y. For-mally, when using x to predict y, the decoder has access to additional k example recordings x1, x 2, . . . , x k and their respective example transcripts y1, y 2, . . . , y k. We refer to x

and y as the target speech and transcript, and the pairs 

(x1, y 1), . . . , (xk, y k) as demonstrations . It is common, es-pecially in text applications, to interleave example-label pairs as demonstrations, but, as we show next, there are potentially better and more natural alternatives. 

A. Collated demonstration 

Since an encoder-decoder model transcribes speech in se-quence, a simple approach to providing demonstrations is, in fact, to present all the example recordings x1, . . . , x k, x 

first followed by all the example transcripts y1, . . . , y k and let the model complete the prediction y. Formally, given the 

k demonstration pairs (x1, y 1), . . . , (xk, y k), decoding with 

collated demonstration for AED models is defined as 

y = Dec (Enc ([ x1; . . . ; xk; x]) , [y1; . . . ; yk]) , (2) where brackets ([]) and semicolons (;) are used for concatenat-ing vectors. Fig. 1(a) (top) shows how collated demonstration is done for AED models. The hope is that the additional transcripts y1, . . . , y k condition the decoder (to attend to 

x1, . . . , x k using attention) when producing y.Collated demonstration can be done similarly for decoder-only architectures (such as the LLM-based ones) using the equation 

y = Dec 

h 

Enc ([ x1; . . . ; xk; x]); y1; . . . ; yk

i 

. (3) The only difference lies in the final concatenation. Additional text prompts are sometimes necessary for LLM-based models. Fig. 1(a) (bottom) shows how collated demonstration is done for decoder-only architectures. In this approach, the decoder sees one long recording that is partially transcribed, and is asked to complete the transcription. In other words, this approach is a form of continued decoding or prefix decoding, and is applicable to 

any encoder-decoder models. Collated demonstration has been explored mostly with Whisper [14], [15], [17], [24]. Pan et al. [23] is the closest to applying collated demonstration to an LLM-based ASR model, albeit with additional instruction fine-tuning. Some work in text-to-speech apply a similar collated demonstration form for the synthesis to follow the speaker style, prosody, accent, etc., [35]–[37], where they often frame it as in-context learning or conditioning. 

B. Interleaved demonstration 

Many recent encoder-decoder ASR models are based on LLMs, and part of the reason to build ASR models with LLMs is to inherit their ICL ability. Text-based ICL typically interleaves example-label pairs when constructing demonstra-tions, and the hope is that LLM-based ASR models can adapt themselves when receiving speech-transcript pairs as context. Formally, given k demonstrations (x1, y 1), . . . , (xk, y k), de-coding with interleaved demonstration is defined as 

y = Dec ([ Enc (x1); y1; . . . ; Enc (xk); yk; Enc (x)]) . (4) Additional text prompts are almost always needed to instruct the decoder if the model is not trained explicitly on the exact interleaved input of the same task. Fig. 1(b) shows how interleaved demonstration is done for LLM-based ASR models. Models other than those based on LLMs are not intended to be used this way, unless the models are explicitly trained to do so. Interleaved demonstration has been studied in LLM-based ASR models [18]–[21]. While effective in certain models [18], [29], interleaved demonstration heavily depends on how mod-els are trained and how the text prompts are constructed. III. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP 

We expect the adaptation performance to heavily depend on the relevance between the demonstrations and the speech to be transcribed, and we need settings suitable for controlling phonetic, lexical, and speaker identity. We sample six models and construct controlled demonstration settings on three data sets, with the goal of answering 1) whether the selected models can perform in-context adaptation and 2) what properties of the demonstrations impact adaptation the most. Results are based on word error rates (WER). We fol-low the Open ASR Leaderboard [38] and use the Whisper normalizer [25] to normalize hypotheses and references to ensure consistent evaluation. Preliminary experiments show that collated demonstration can be quite sensitive to the text format or the selected examples, so to stabilize the generation, we suppress the EOS token for the first decoding step for all models to ensure the model produces at least one output token for the target audio. 

A. Models and Data 

We sample six open-sourced models, mainly from the Open ASR Leaderboard, covering attention-based encoder-decoder models (AED) and decoder-only LLM-based models. For LLM-based models, some are omni models that preserve LLM capabilities and can process text, image, and audio, while others behave strictly as an ASR model. Table I summarizes the selected models, their architecture, and whether the model is designed for taking interleaved speech and text. Even though Canary-Qwen and Qwen3-ASR use an LLM, they are not intended to be used for ICL. Phi-4-MM and Qwen2.5-Omni are potentially designed with ICL in mind, since they are exposed to interleaving modality during training and preserve LLM capabilities with speech input. To control the properties of demonstrations, we evaluate in-context adaptation on L2-Arctic [39], LibriSpeech [40], and AMI [41], [42]. L2-Arctic is a data set consisting of read speech from non-native English speakers. L2-Arctic is ideal for our purpose because the sentences are phonetically balanced and the same set of sentences are read by multiple speakers. L2-Arctic has been recently used to study in-context                   

> TABLE I ASUMMARY OF THE SELECTED ASR MODELS . M ODELS THAT ARE EXPOSED TO INTERLEAVED INPUT MODALITY DURING TRAINING ARE MARKED AS INTENDED FOR ICL.
> Model Architecture ICL
> Whisper [25] AED not intended Canary [26] AED not intended Canary-Qwen [27] LLM-based (ASR-only) not intended Qwen3-ASR [28] LLM-based (ASR-only) not intended Phi-4-MM [29] LLM-based (Omni) intended Qwen2.5-Omni [30] LLM-based (Omni) intended

adaptation to speaker, accent, and lexical content [19], [20]. LibriSpeech is commonly used in ASR, but more importantly, it is useful for studying contextual biasing [43]–[45] and in our case, for controlling demonstrations of lexical similarities. AMI consists of spontaneous speech in meetings and is used to test the generalization beyond read speech. 

B. Demonstration settings 

To study what properties of demonstrations impact the adaptation the most, we consider eight demonstration settings, exploring phonetic, lexical, and speaker similarity. We con-sider two extreme settings, one with demonstrations randomly sampled from a data set (labeled as Random ) and one with the demonstration containing the same ground truth transcript as the target (labeled as Gold text ). We consider two other settings based on phonetic and lexical similarity (labeled as 

Phonetic and Lexical respectively). Given an utterance to be decoded, other utterances in the data set are first ranked based on either phonetic similarity or lexical similarity to the current utterance. The first few that are ranked top are used as demonstrations. More formally, given the target speech x

and its transcript y, the k demonstrations are collected from a data set S using 

(x1, y 1), . . . , (xk, y k) = top-k

> (x′,y ′)∈S

sim (( x, y ), (x′, y ′)) , (5) where sim (·, ·) is a similarity function. Note that y does not need to be the ground truth transcript of the target speech 

x and can be the first-pass transcription of an ASR system, whereas the utterances in the data set S always have the ground truth transcript. For simplicity, phonetic similarity is computed based on term frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) of phone trigrams, and lexical similarity is based on TF-IDF of words excluding stopwords. Designing retrieval methods to select useful demonstrations is an active research area [15], [20], [24], though our choice works sufficiently well as we will see in the experiments. The demonstrations presented to a model are ordered by similarity, with the most similar ordered last, i.e., closest to the utterance to be decoded. All settings are then doubled by controlling whether the demonstrations come from the same speaker or not. Except in the Gold text setting, we ensure that the same text as the target is never included in the demonstrations. For the Gold text setting with the same speaker, the demonstration is the target speech and its ground truth transcript. TABLE II WER S OF IN -CONTEXT ADAPTATION IN CORNER CASES ON L2-A RCTIC .THE SYMBOL ∅ DENOTES THE BASELINE WITHOUT DEMONSTRATIONS .THE RANDOM SETTING INCLUDES A SINGLE RANDOM DEMONSTRATION FROM A different SPEAKER , AND THE GOLD TEXT SETTING INCLUDES THE TARGET SPEECH AND ITS GROUND TRUTH TRANSCRIPT AS THE DEMONSTRATION .                       

> ∅Random Gold text
> Whisper 7.8 7.3 0.6 Canary 6.8 6.7 2.2 Canary-Qwen 6.7 6.6 0.2 Qwen3-ASR 6.0 5.9 0.1 Phi-4-MM 6.7 6.7 0.3 Qwen2.5-Omni 5.5 5.6 0.1
> Fig. 2. WERs when separating the demonstration and the target speech with silence in the Gold text setting on L2-Arctic. The results show the potential limit of a model’s ability to handle long-form audio.

Even though the Phonetic and Lexical settings require access to the ground truth transcript of the target utterance, we will relax this assumption and experiment in the same setting with first-pass transcripts to select the demonstrations. We emphasize the importance of these oracle experiments as they answer whether a model is capable of in-context adaptation and to what extent the properties of demonstrations impact the adaptation. The oracle results are also largely missing in prior work. IV. R ESULTS 

To see whether the selected models can perform in-context adaptation, we first test the corner cases, providing random demonstrations or gold demonstrations. We will then present a comprehensive comparison including the phonetic and lexical settings, and study generalization of in-context adaptation to other data sets. 

A. In-context adaptation in corner cases 

There are two corner cases tested here: 1) whether models can ignore irrelevant demonstrations and 2) whether models can copy the ground truth when they are given. For the first case, one irrelevant demonstration is selected randomly from other speakers, and for the second, we provide the identical recording and its ground truth as demonstration. These two corner cases serve as sanity checks that the models need to pass if we want to claim that they can perform in-context adaptation. We limit ourselves to collated demonstration here because, as we have argued, it is trivially applicable to all models. Table II shows the results of the two corner cases, and we see that all models pass the test. The results with random demonstrations are close to the results without demonstrations. All models achieve near-perfect WERs when providing the ground truth. Together, all models are capable of in-context adaptation in these two corner cases. In addition, we insert an arbitrarily long silence between the demonstration and the speech to be decoded. A model that is capable of in-context adaptation should be able to ignore the silence. However, it is well known that encoder-decoder models suffer when the input audio is too long, beyond the typ-ical length seen during training [31], [46], [47]. Fig. 2 shows how models cope with the inserted silence, and we indeed see that Canary and Phi-4-MM (and perhaps Canary-Qwen to a certain degree) can only perform in-context adaptation within a certain context length. For the rest of the experiments, we respect this limit and fit as many demonstrations as possible without breaking the models. 1

B. Impact of different demonstration settings 

To quantify how different sources of information in speech contribute to adaptation, we compare demonstrations selected based on phonetic and lexical similarities, in addition to the two corner cases. We also extend the number of demonstra-tions up to four. After controlling the speakers, we have a total of eight demonstration settings. Fig. 3 shows how much models are able to adapt based on four demonstrations of different types. First, except Random 

with different speakers, all demonstration settings lead to improved WERs. In particular, all models have no trouble getting near-perfect WERs with the Gold text demonstrations. While Gold text is not realistic, it does show the importance of speakers in the demonstrations. The Gold text WERs are slightly higher when the speakers are different from the target speech. We then look at demonstration settings that do not contain duplicate text to the target transcript. Selecting random utter-ances from the same speaker achieves a small but consistent gain. Demonstrations selected based on phonetic and lexical similarity (especially from the same speaker) lead to the most improvement, with lexical similarity slightly better. This trend holds across all models. Notably, the smaller AED models, Whisper and Canary-1B, achieve similar relative WER reduction to larger models equipped with pretrained LLM decoders. This suggests that the adaptation capability does not inherently depend on the use of a pre-trained LLM. The amount of adaptation for different numbers of demon-strations is shown in Fig. 4. We only contrast the Random 

and the Lexical setting for clarity. Overall, from one to four examples, the more demonstrations we provide, the lower the WER. The first two demonstrations bring the most improve-ment, and adding more demonstrations diminishes the return.        

> 1In the case of L2-Arctic, 30 seconds are sufficient to fit 4 demonstrations. Whisper Canary Canary-Qwen Qwen3-ASR Phi-4-MM Qwen2.5-Omni
> 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0
> WER (%)
> 7.8 6.8 6.7 6.0 6.7 5.5 7.4 6.8 6.8 6.0 6.6 5.1 6.7 6.4 6.3 5.7 5.7 5.1 6.1 5.7 6.0 4.9 5.5 4.6 5.3 5.2 5.1 4.6 4.8 4.3 5.8 5.6 5.6 4.8 5.4 4.4 5.1 5.0 5.0 4.5 4.6 4.1 1.0 2.2 1.9 1.4 2.1 1.7 0.6 1.7 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.1
> Collated
> Phi-4-MM Qwen2.5-Omni
> 6.7 5.5 6.1 4.5 6.1 4.4 5.6 4.2 5.7 4.0 5.3 3.9 5.3 3.7 2.1 1.1 1.5 0.6
> Interleaved
> Baseline Random (diff spk) Random (same spk) Phonetic (diff spk) Phonetic (same spk) Lexical (diff spk) Lexical (same spk) Gold text (diff spk) Gold text (same spk)

Fig. 3. WERs of in-context adaptation on L2-Arctic for different demonstration settings. We use 4 demonstrations for all settings except the Gold text , which only has 1 demonstration. 

Fig. 4. The absolute WER on L2-Arctic under the Random and Lexical settings as we increase the number of demonstrations from 1 to 4. 

C. Comparing collated and interleaved demonstration 

Comparing Phi-4-MM and Qwen2.5-Omni in Fig. 3 and Fig. 5, we see that both models are able to adapt based on collated and interleaved demonstration. For interleaved demonstration, we follow the exact same instruction prompt in Roll et al. [19] for both Phi-4-MM and Qwen2.5-Omni. Note that prompt engineering is required for interleaved demon-stration for both models. Without this instruction prompt, we observe much weaker adaptation, especially if only a single example is provided. Even though Canary-Qwen and Qwen3-ASR are based on LLMs, they are not intended to take interleaved input and we also do not observe any adaptation effect when providing interleaved demonstrations for these two models. A key ad-vantage of collated demonstration is that it is applicable to all models, requires no modification to the text instruction and task prompt, and works out of the box. 

D. In-context adaptation on different domains 

We extend our analysis to LibriSpeech ( test-other ) and AMI. We again contrast Random and Lexical for clarity. The top row of Fig. 5 shows the results on LibriSpeech test-other . We see that the overall improvement is smaller on these two data sets compared to L2-Arctic. In particular, providing utterances just from the same speaker is overall less effective. Using lexically similar utterances from the same speaker continues to be the best strategy, achieving at least 20% relative WER reduction with collated demonstration. Results on AMI are shown in the bottom row of Fig. 5. Since AMI is the more challenging data set consisting of spontaneous speech, the adaptation is again less effective. In fact, Phi-4-MM completely fails under interleaved demon-stration, where we found the WER collapses due to severe copying from the demonstration transcripts, though Qwen2.5-Omni adapts just fine. The conclusion is largely the same as in LibriSpeech, lexically similar demonstrations from the same speaker achieve the most improvement. Interestingly, while LLM-based models show marginal gains under the Lexical setting, Whisper shows the largest gains, almost closing the WER gap to the LLM-based ASR mod-els. This again suggests that the effectiveness of in-context adaptation does not necessarily require the use of an LLM. V. S ECOND -PASS IN -CONTEXT ADAPTATION 

Our oracle results, though promising, assume access to the ground truth transcript of the target speech. To evaluate the gains in practical scenarios, we relax the assumption and use first-pass transcriptions to find demonstrations of the same speaker and of high lexical similarity. For simplicity, we use the same TF-IDF in the Lexical setting in §III-B. We decide to measure similarity using ASR transcripts but still use gold transcriptions in demonstrations. Formally, assuming that we have a data set S with gold transcriptions, we construct the demonstrations with 

(x1, y 1), . . . , (xk, y k) = top-k

> (x′,y ′)∈S

TF-IDF (T (x), T (x′)) , (6) Fig. 5. Relative WER reduction of in-context adaptation against no adaptation on LibriSpeech test-other (top) and AMI test split from Open ASR Leaderboard (bottom). We use relative reduction because the WERs span a larger dynamic range across models compared to L2-Arctic. TABLE III WER S OF SECOND -PASS IN -CONTEXT ADAPTATION ON L2-A RCTIC IN THE RANDOM AND LEXICAL SETTINGS USING 4 DEMONSTRATIONS FROM THE same SPEAKERS . T HE first pass COLUMN USES THE FIRST -PASS TRANSCRIPTION FOR SELECTING DEMONSTRATIONS , WHEREAS THE                                      

> oracle COLUMN SELECTS DEMONSTRATIONS WITH THE GROUND TRUTH TRANSCRIPTS .Model ∅Random Lexical
> first pass oracle
> Collated demonstration
> Whisper 7.8 6.7 6.0 5.1 Canary 6.8 6.1 5.5 5.0 Canary-Qwen 6.7 6.2 5.5 5.0 Qwen3-ASR 6.0 5.6 5.0 4.5 Phi-4-MM 6.7 5.7 5.4 4.6 Qwen2.5-Omni 5.5 5.1 4.5 4.1
> Interleaved demonstration
> Phi-4-MM 6.7 6.1 5.9 5.3 Qwen2.5-Omni 5.5 4.4 4.2 3.7

where T is an ASR system and T (x) is the first-pass transcript of the target speech x. Note that the ground truth transcript of the example y′ is not used in computing TF-IDF. Results with this second-pass in-context adaptation on L2-Arctic are shown in Table III. We see a further 3% to 12% relative WER reduction over the Random setting, cor-responding to closing 25% to 60% of the gaps against the oracle. The second-pass approach is similar to those based on retrieval [15], [20], [24]. While the retrieval approaches are complementary to ours, a simple second pass already brings a significant improvement. VI. D ISCUSSION 

Though both collated and interleaved demonstration can achieve in-context adaptation, their underlying mechanism might be different. Collated demonstration operates as one ASR task, while interleaved demonstration requires additional understanding of text instructions and the interleaving format. This fact makes collated demonstration widely applicable to any encoder-decoder ASR system, and makes interleaved demonstration sensitive to exact wording of the text prompts. Partly because of this, the performance of interleaved demon-stration varies a lot more across data sets compared to that of collated demonstration. Both demonstration approaches, however, are limited by the context length of the model. It is well known that ASR systems suffer from long-form audio or the audio length beyond training [31], [46], [47]. The problem is partially addressed by the use of an LLM, as long-context modeling [29], [48] are now an integrated part of training LLMs. The gains of using more demonstrations do diminish in our experiments, so this limitation might not be as significant. VII. C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we study in-context adaptation in ASR with two approaches, collated and interleaved demonstration. We show that, without any training, in-context adaptation achieves significant gains across a diverse set of models and settings. The oracle experiments not only establish the fact that all models tested are capable of in-context adaptation but also show the limit of what in-context adaptation can achieve. Notably, smaller AED models adapt as effectively as larger LLM-based models, suggesting that in-context adaptation in ASR does not inherently depend on an LLM decoder. Between the two demonstration approaches, collated demonstration is trivially applicable to any encoder-decoder ASR system, while interleaved demonstration is only applica-ble to certain models, requiring specific text prompts. We also show that our approaches are practical, relaxing the oracle results with first-pass hypotheses while maintaining a large proportion of the improvements. Future work includes a deeper understanding of the mechanism behind in-context adaptation, designing experiments to disentangle the contri-bution of text and audio, developing retrieval approaches for finding better demonstrations, and extending to other settings, such as noise robustness and low-resource ASR. VIII. G ENERATIVE AI U SE DISCLOSURE 

Generative AI tools (Claude) were only used for language and grammar polishing of the manuscript. All technical con-tent, experimental design, and results were produced by the authors. REFERENCES [1] Q. Dong, L. Li, D. Dai, C. Zheng, J. Ma, R. Li, H. Xia, J. Xu, Z. Wu, B. Chang et al. , “A survey on in-context learning,” in EMNLP , 2024. [2] S. Min, X. Lyu, A. Holtzman, M. Artetxe, M. Lewis, H. Hajishirzi, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning work?” in EMNLP , 2022. [3] K.-W. Chang, M.-H. Hsu, S.-W. Li, and H.-y. Lee, “Exploring in-context learning of textless speech language model for speech classification tasks,” in Interspeech , 2024. [4] J. H. Wong, M. Huzaifah, N. F. Chen, and A. T. Aw, “Speech in-context learning of paralinguistic tasks,” in ASRU , 2025. [5] M. Ihori, T. Yamane, N. Kawata, N. Makishima, T. Tanaka, S. Suzuki, S. Orihashi, and R. Masumura, “Few-shot personalization via in-context learning for speech emotion recognition based on speech-language model,” in ASRU , 2025. [6] Z. Chen, H. Huang, A. Andrusenko, O. Hrinchuk, K. C. Puvvada, J. Li, S. Ghosh, J. Balam, and B. Ginsburg, “SALM: Speech-augmented language model with in-context learning for speech recognition and translation,” in ICASSP , 2024. [7] I. Tsiamas, M. Sperber, A. Finch, and S. Garg, “Speech is more than words: Do speech-to-text translation systems leverage prosody?” in 

Conference on Machine Translation , 2024. [8] D. Zhang, G. Wang, J. Xue, K. Fang, L. Zhao, R. Ma, S. Ren, S. Liu, T. Guo, W. Zhuang et al. , “Mimo-audio: Audio language models are few-shot learners,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.23808 , 2025. [9] T. A. Nguyen, B. Muller, B. Yu, M. R. Costa-Jussa, M. Elbayad, S. Popuri, C. Ropers, P.-A. Duquenne, R. Algayres, R. Mavlyutov 

et al. , “Spirit-LM: Interleaved spoken and written language model,” 

Transactions of ACL , 2025. [10] C. Pouw, H. Mohebbi, A. Alishahi, and W. Zuidema, “In-context learning in speech language models: Analyzing the role of acous-tic features, linguistic structure, and induction heads,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.06356 , 2026. [11] Z. Kong, A. Goel, R. Badlani, W. Ping, R. Valle, and B. Catanzaro, “Audio Flamingo: A novel audio language model with few-shot learning and dialogue abilities,” in ICML , 2024. [12] Y.-T. Piao, J. C. Liao, W.-T. Chien, T. Ogimoto, S.-T. Chen, Y.-N. Chen, C.-Y. Lee, and S.-Y. Lo, “ALICE: A multifaceted evaluation framework of large audio-language models’ in-context learning ability,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.20433 , 2026. [13] N. Agrawal and S. Ganapathy, “Spoken language understanding on unseen tasks with in-context learning,” in Interspeech , 2025. [14] S. Wang, C.-H. Yang, J. Wu, and C. Zhang, “Can Whisper perform speech-based in-context learning?” in ICASSP , 2024. [15] J. Zhou, S. Zhao, J. He, H. Wang, W. Zeng, Y. Chen, H. Sun, A. Kong, and Y. Qin, “M2R-Whisper: Multi-stage and multi-scale retrieval aug-mentation for enhancing Whisper,” in ICASSP , 2025. [16] J. Cheng and S. Nguyen, “Speech few-shot learning for language learners’ speech recognition,” in ICASSP , 2025. [17] M.-H. Hsu and H.-y. Lee, “SMILE: Speech meta in-context learning for low-resource language automatic speech recognition,” in ASRU , 2025. [18] Omnilingual ASR team, G. Keren, A. Kozhevnikov, Y. Meng, C. Ropers, M. Setzler, S. Wang, I. Adebara, M. Auli, C. Balioglu, K. Chan, C. Cheng, J. Chuang, C. Droof, M. Duppenthaler, P.-A. Duquenne, A. Erben, C. Gao, G. M. Gonzalez, K. Lyu, S. Miglani, V. Pratap, K. R. Sadagopan, S. Saleem, A. Turkatenko, A. Ventayol-Boada, Z.-X. Yong, Y.-A. Chung, J. Maillard, R. Moritz, A. Mourachko, M. Williamson, and S. Yates, “Omnilingual ASR: Open-source multilingual speech recognition for 1600+ languages,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.09690 [19] N. Roll, C. Graham, Y. Tatsumi, K. T. Nguyen, M. Sumner, and D. Jurafsky, “In-context learning boosts speech recognition via human-like adaptation to speakers and language varieties,” in EMNLP , 2025. [20] H. Zheng, Y. Yegorova, and M. Hasegawa-Johnson, “TICL: Text-embedding KNN for speech in-context learning unlocks speech recog-nition abilities of large multimodal models,” in ICASSP , 2025. [21] Z. Li and J. Niehues, “Multimodal in-context learning for ASR of low-resource languages,” in Findings of the ACL , 2026. [22] H. Zheng, Y. Yegorova, and M. Hasegawa-Johnson, “TICL+: A case study on speech in-context learning for children’s speech recognition,” in ASRU Satellite Workshop—AI for Children’s Speech and Language ,2025. [23] J. Pan, J. Wu, Y. Gaur, S. Sivasankaran, Z. Chen, S. Liu, and J. Li, “COSMIC: Data efficient instruction-tuning for speech in-context learn-ing,” in Interspeech , 2024. [24] S. Wang, C.-H. H. Yang, J. Wu, and C. Zhang, “Bayesian example selec-tion improves in-context learning for speech, text and visual modalities,” in EMNLP , 2024. [25] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, T. Xu, G. Brockman, C. McLeavey, and I. Sutskever, “Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak super-vision,” in ICML , 2023. [26] K. C. Puvvada, P. ˙ Zelasko, H. Huang, O. Hrinchuk, N. R. Koluguri, K. Dhawan, S. Majumdar, E. Rastorgueva, Z. Chen, V. Lavrukhin et al. ,“Less is more: Accurate speech recognition & translation without web-scale data,” in Interspeech , 2024. [27] NVIDIA, “NVIDIA NeMo Canary-Qwen-2.5B,” https://huggingface.co/nvidia/canary-qwen-2.5b, 2025, Hugging Face model card. Accessed: 2026-06-08. [28] X. Shi, X. Wang, Z. Guo, Y. Wang, P. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Guo, H. Hao, Y. Xi, B. Yang et al. , “Qwen3-ASR technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21337 , 2026. [29] A. Abouelenin, A. Ashfaq, A. Atkinson, H. Awadalla, N. Bach, J. Bao, A. Benhaim, M. Cai, V. Chaudhary, C. Chen et al. , “Phi-4-mini technical report: Compact yet powerful multimodal language models via mixture-of-LoRAs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01743 , 2025. [30] J. Xu, Z. Guo, J. He, H. Hu, T. He, S. Bai, K. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Fan, K. Dang, B. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Chu, and J. Lin, “Qwen2.5-Omni technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20215 , 2025. [31] J. K. Chorowski, D. Bahdanau, D. Serdyuk, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Attention-based models for speech recognition,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2015. [32] W. Chan, N. Jaitly, Q. V. Le, and O. Vinyals, “Listen, attend and spell: A neural network for large vocabulary conversational speech recognition,” in ICASSP , 2016. [33] J. Wu, Y. Gaur, Z. Chen, L. Zhou, Y. Zhu, T. Wang, J. Li, S. Liu, B. Ren, L. Liu et al. , “On decoder-only architecture for speech-to-text and large language model integration,” in ASRU , 2023. [34] E. Tsunoo, H. Futami, Y. Kashiwagi, S. Arora, and S. Watanabe, “Decoder-only architecture for speech recognition with CTC prompts and text data augmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08876 , 2023. [35] L. Meng, L. Zhou, S. Liu, S. Chen, B. Han, S. Hu, Y. Liu, J. Li, S. Zhao, X. Wu et al. , “Autoregressive speech synthesis without vector quantization,” in ACL , 2025. [36] Z. Jiang, J. Liu, Y. Ren, J. He, Z. Ye, S. Ji, Q. Yang, C. Zhang, P. Wei, C. Wang, X. Yin, Z. MA, and Z. Zhao, “Mega-TTS 2: Boosting prompting mechanisms for zero-shot speech synthesis,” in ICLR , 2024. [37] Z. Du, Y. Wang, Q. Chen, X. Shi, X. Lv, T. Zhao, Z. Gao, Y. Yang, C. Gao, H. Wang et al. , “Cosyvoice 2: Scalable streaming speech synthesis with large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10117 ,2024. [38] V. Srivastav, S. Zheng, E. Bezzam, E. L. Bihan, N. Koluguri, P. ˙ Zelasko, S. Majumdar, A. Moumen, and S. Gandhi, “Open ASR leaderboard: Towards reproducible and transparent multilingual and long-form speech recognition evaluation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.06961 , 2025. [39] G. Zhao, S. Sonsaat, A. Silpachai, I. Lucic, E. Chukharev-Hudilainen, J. M. Levis, and R. Gutierrez-Osuna, “L2-ARCTIC: A non-native english speech corpus,” in Interspeech , 2018. [40] V. Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “LibriSpeech: An ASR corpus based on public domain audio books,” in ICASSP , 2015. [41] J. Carletta, S. Ashby, S. Bourban, M. Flynn, M. Guillemot, T. Hain, J. Kadlec, V. Karaiskos, W. Kraaij, M. Kronenthal et al. , “The AMI meeting corpus: A pre-announcement,” in International Workshop on Machine Learning for Multimodal Interaction , 2005. [42] S. Renals, T. Hain, and H. Bourlard, “Recognition and understanding of meetings the AMI and AMIDA projects,” in ASRU , 2007. [43] J. Tang, K. Kim, S. Shon, F. Wu, and P. Sridhar, “Improving ASR contextual biasing with guided attention,” in ICASSP , 2024. [44] X. Gong, A. Lv, Z. Wang, H. Zhu, and Y. Qian, “BR-ASR: Efficient and scalable bias retrieval framework for contextual biasing ASR in speech LLM,” in Interspeech , 2025. [45] X. Fu, K. M. Sathyendra, A. Gandhe, J. Liu, G. P. Strimel, R. McGowan, and A. Mouchtaris, “Robust acoustic and semantic contextual biasing in neural transducers for speech recognition,” in ICASSP , 2023. [46] C.-C. Chiu, W. Han, Y. Zhang, R. Pang, S. Kishchenko, P. Nguyen, A. Narayanan, H. Liao, S. Zhang, A. Kannan et al. , “A comparison of end-to-end models for long-form speech recognition,” in ASRU , 2019. [47] Y. Zhang, W. Han, J. Qin, Y. Wang, A. Bapna, Z. Chen, N. Chen, B. Li, V. Axelrod, G. Wang et al. , “Google USM: Scaling automatic speech recognition beyond 100 languages,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.01037 ,2023. [48] A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao, C. Huang, C. Lv et al. , “Qwen3 technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025.